Digital Entrepreneurship and Innovation Central America December 2021 About IFC IFC—a member the World Bank Group—is the largest global development institution focused the private sector emerging markets. work more than 100 countries, using our capital, expertise, and influence create markets and opportunities developing countries. fiscal year 2021, IFC committed record $31.5 billion private companies and financial institutions developing countries, leveraging the power the private sector end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity economies grapple with the impacts the COVID-19 pandemic. For more information, visit www.ifc.org. International Finance Corporation 2021. All rights reserved. 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20433 www.ifc.org The material this work copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions all this work without permission may violation applicable law. IFC does not guarantee the accuracy, reliability completeness the content included this work, the conclusions judgments described herein, and accepts responsibility liability for any omissions errors (including, without limitation, typographical errors and technical errors) the content whatsoever for reliance thereon. The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those the authors and not necessarily reflect the views the Executive Directors the International Finance Corporation the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) the governments they represent. OVAT CEN PREFACE The COVID-19 pandemic has threatened worsen the technologies, such lack awareness about what welfare Central America. affecting employment, technologies exist, uncertainties about the return growth, trade, foreign direct investment, productivity, investment technologies, and lack access and the competitiveness certain value chains. finance and talent acquire and use technologies. The The digital ecosystem more important than ever region needs adopt regional e-commerce strategy Central America. Firms need digitalize their and digital business transformation strategy. The operations and sales adapt the post-COVID strategies should contain least the promotion situation and reactivate economies. Businesses regional electronic commerce platform; promotion the digital sector and high-tech manufacturing regional access finance for digital transformation Central America are more productive than the average and innovation micro, small, and medium enterprises firm. Small firms Central America are just beginning (MSMEs); improvement trade procedures and adopt technology, although there has been some regulations; promotion low-cost electronic payment progress recently due COVID-19. Firms the region mechanisms; revision specific regulations for the see e-commerce, fintech, and robotics especially digital sector; and promotion linkages between the transformative their sectors over the next decade. supply and demand for technology. However, firms also perceive challenges adopting Regional Vice President: Wiebke Schloeme Regional Director: Martin Spicer Regional Head Operations: Luc Grillet Creating Markets Manager: Damien Shiels Manager IFC Central America: Sanaa Abouzaid Team Leaders: Mayra Alfaro Morán, Pedro Andres Amo Core Team: Marcio Cruz, Gabriela Montenegro, Jesica Torres, Kati Suominen (Nextrade Group), Aarre Laakso, Nataly Lovo, Juan Francisco González Peer Reviewers: Ami Dalal, Rocío Sánchez, Carolina Cárdenas, Lorena Rodríguez OVAT CEN CONTENTS Preface Abbreviations Acknowledgments Executive Summary Introduction Methodology and Conceptual Framework Entrepreneurship Ecosystems Central America 3.1. Local Entrepreneurship Ecosystems 3.2. Digital Technologies and High-Tech Manufacturing 3.3. Tradable Services: Tourism, Financial Services, and BPO 3.4. Agribusiness and Light Manufacturing 3.5. Summary High-Potential Local Ecosystems Central America Public Programs and Intermediary Organizations Central America 4.1. Government Programs Supporting Entrepreneurship 4.2. Intermediary Organizations Supporting Entrepreneurship Adoption Technology 5.1. Demand for Technology 5.2. Challenges firms face adopting technologies 5.3. Use Technology tech companies 5.4. Challenges faced digital providers and other entrepreneurs Policy Recommendations Annex List Programs that Support the Entrepreneurship Ecosystem Costa Rica, Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras Annex Services Provided Programs that Support Entrepreneurship Annex List Stakeholders, Survey Respondents, and Participants Focus Groups Annex Survey Demand for Digital Services Key Sectors Annex 107 Survey Digital Service Providers Bibliography 118 OVAT CEN ABBREVIATIONS Fourth Generation Fifth Generation Artificial Intelligence B2B Business-to-Business B2C Business-to-Consumer B2G Business-to-Government BANDESAL Development Bank Salvador BPO Business Process Outsourcing CABEI Central American Bank for Economic Integration CATI Computer-Assisted Telephone Interview CDEs Centers for MSME Enterprise Development CENPROMYPE Center for the Promotion Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises CEO Chief Executive Officer COMIECO Council Ministers for Economic Integration CONAMYPE National Micro and Small Business Commission FAT Firm Adoption Technology FIAS Facility for Investment Climate Advisory Services ICT Information and Communications Technology IFC International Finance Corporation IHCIETI Honduran Institute Science, Technology and Innovation Internet Protocol ISIC International Standard Industrial Classification Information Technology MEIC Ministry Economy, Investment and Trade MIPYME Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises MSMEs Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises NGO Non-Governmental Organization PROCOMER Costa Rican Trade Promotion Agency PROPYME Costa Rican Small and Medium Enterprise Support Program SBDC Small Business Development Center SDE Secretarial for Economic Development SENPRENDE Honduran National Service for Entrepreneurship and Small Business SICA Central American Integration System SIECA Secretariat for Central American Economic Integration SMEs Small and Medium Enterprises SSFM Seed-Stage Funding Mechanism STEM Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics USD United States Dollars OVAT CEN ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This report was prepared team led Mayra Alfaro Moran (Senior Operations Officer) and Pedro Andres Amo (Operations Officer). The core team included Gabriela Montenegro (Senior Consultant and main researcher), Marcio Cruz (Senior Economist), Jesica Torres (Extended Term Consultant), Aarre Laakso (Consultant and editor), Nataly Lovo (Consultant), and Kati Suominen (Nextrade Group). The team also received contributions from Tanay Belantrapu (Extended Term Consultant), and Juan Francisco González (Consultant). Special thanks the Center for the Promotion Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (CENPROMYPE), the Governments Costa Rica, Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, and the private sector, and non-governmental organization (NGO) representatives each country, for sharing information and their views their main challenges and recommendations. The report was supported the Facility for Investment Climate Advisory Services, FIAS (thefias.info).¹ The team would like thank the peer reviewers Ami Dalal (Senior Investment Officer Upstream), Rocío Sánchez (Digital Development Specialist), Carolina Cardenas (Senior Investment Officer), and Lorena Rodríguez (Country Officer) for their excellent comments and feedback. The report was prepared under the strategic guidance the management team, Alejandro Alvarez Campa (Previous Manager Creating Markets Advisory), Damien Shiels (Manager Creating Markets Advisory), Sanaa Abouzaid (Manager Central America), Luc Grillet (Regional Head Operations), and Martin Spicer (Regional Director Latin America and the Caribbean). ¹The FIAS partnership was established 1985 provide advice governments reforms needed improve their investment climate. Today, the FIAS program co-financed the World Bank Group and nearly development partners. OVAT CEN EXECUTIVE SUMMARY COVID-19 has made the digital revolution more This report assesses entrepreneurship ecosystems important than ever. addition creating Central America and provides series need avoid physical contact, the pandemic recommendations. The International Finance affecting employment, growth, trade, foreign direct Corporation (IFC), under the Digital Innovation investment, productivity, and the competitiveness Entrepreneurship Central America project carried certain value chains. Despite initial reduction out the assessment the request CENPROMYPE. projections, remittances experienced positive growth The assessment was carried out four countries 2020–2021. Firms need digitalize their operations Central America—Costa Rica, Salvador, and sales adapt the post-pandemic situation Guatemala, and Honduras—and combined set and reactivate economies. necessary analytical instruments. included analysis digitalize sales, marketing, and production processes firm-level micro-data, analysis public transform the supply chain and competitive. programs and intermediary organizations support Many individual entrepreneurs and services firms entrepreneurship, focus groups, and online survey can offer their services via the Internet, transforming more than 2,000 firms technology use. themselves into regional global service providers. The assessment confirmed that businesses the Digitalization changing how business done, digital sector and high-tech manufacturing are opening opportunities for entrepreneurs—including more productive than others. Yet, such firms face women entrepreneurs—to enter global value chains many challenges. The findings and the corresponding (Rajahonka and Villman 2019). The digital revolution recommendations also cover challenges that make crucial for innovations reduce physical contact, difficult for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) improve access regional and international markets, digitalize their operations and for start-ups and increase investments. general. Table below covers subjects diverse strong entrepreneurial ecosystem essential productivity, public programs, intermediary for digital revolution. Growing businesses—especially organizations, need for training and support small businesses—cannot “go digital” their own. transform and adapt operations e-commerce, need They depend supporting services for their success increase access finance, need improve business and finding sufficient demand. These supporting environment and regulations and move forward services include laws and regulations, technology e-government, and need consider public policies infrastructure, vendors technology products and support the tech industry. services, networking opportunities, access finance for every business phase, nearby agglomerations businesses the same sector, public programs, intermediary organizations, human capital, and access markets. OVAT CEN Table SUMMARY MAIN FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS Findings/challenges Recommendations Suggested responsible agencies and timeframe Small firms Central America Approve and adopt regional CENPROMYPE and the Council are just beginning adopt e-commerce strategy and Ministers for Economic technology–most are still digital business transformation Integration (COMIECO). using manual methods and strategy and supporting basic digital tools manage programs encourage Approval–Short term operations, sales, payments, technology adoption for SMEs. marketing, and decision-making (The contents the strategies Adoption–Medium term processes. are described below with the relevant findings.) There substantial Promote coordination among Ministries economy/MIPYME heterogeneity local government, supporting agencies, ministries science ecosystems. Public programs organizations, and donors and technology, and innovation and intermediary organizations define priorities across local agencies. are providing business ecosystems and identify critical development services without gaps support start-ups, Short term clear orientation toward especially digital start-ups. high-potential ecosystems. Reorient existing programs the needs local ecosystems. For example, restructure programs support early-stage business and create more linkages between supply and demand for technology. Create technology centers Ministries economy/MIPYME coordination with incubators/ agencies, ministries science accelerators offer extension and technology, and innovation services and laboratories agencies, coordination with for testing and prototyping incubators/accelerators. geographic areas where there are high-potential Medium term entrepreneurship ecosystems. Lack awareness about what Provide technical assistance CENPROMYPE, ministries technologies exist digitalize. SMEs technologies economy/MIPYME agencies, available through business ministries science and associations and small business technology, and innovation development centers (SBDCs) agencies through business associations and SBDCs. Short term There are limited links between Use the digital business CENPROMYPE, ministries the supply and demand for transformation strategy and economy/MIPYME agencies, digital products and services. marketplace platforms the ministries science and first steps toward encouraging technology, and innovation governments, accelerators, agencies through business universities, and business associations and SBDCs. associations promote linkages between digital Medium term service providers and national, regional, and international industries. Findings/challenges Recommendations Suggested responsible agencies and timeframe Firms all sizes across the Provide technical assistance CENPROMYPE, ministries region perceive need for programs help SMEs economy/MIPYME agencies, support and training using digitalize their operations. ministries science and digital technologies. Provide transformation awards technology, and innovation for Central American firms that agencies through business have translated technologies associations, SBDCs, universities, into growth motivate more and business schools. firms test new technologies. Medium term Access finance one the Establish regional facilities Central American Bank for main constraints companies for digital transformation and Economic Integration (CABEI) with respect digitalization. create differentiated credit with support from IFC. Access finance general policy for SMEs. Countries still underserved area could also create digital Short term most countries Central transformation facilities that America. Many the options leverage existing government for formal access finance SME and technology funds require that companies have and co-finance viable digital been operating for long time transformation projects with and have assets back their the target firms, private loans. Financial institutions’ lack lenders, and investors. The appetite for financing small digital business transformation businesses drives entrepreneurs strategy should include pawnshops and very informal promoting regional access non-regulated financial finance for digital entities that provide extremely transformation and innovation expensive credit. micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs). Most digital start-ups need capital rather than debt For tech companies, IFC. grow, but the market for vital support facilities for seed, venture, and private incubators/accelerators, such Short term equity funds Central IFC Startup Catalyst, America underdeveloped. facility through which invest The ecosystem value portfolio seed-stage technology-based start-ups funding mechanisms Central America estimated (SSFMs) through equity and USD 319 million (USD quasi-equity instruments. million raised), about 0.14 These SSFMs, turn, support percent the value the entrepreneurs and their Latin American and Caribbean early-stage companies across total ecosystem USD 221 IFC target markets. billion. However, only percent innovators seeking The regulatory framework Financial system regulators. equity find investors the first most countries needs months. modified and regionally Medium term harmonized foster financial Incubators/accelerators innovation and access primarily focus managerial finance, including protection training and capacity building for minority investors. for businesses the early important create regulatory stages, but just few offer conditions that would allow access finance. for early-stage financing through venture capital and crowdfunding. OVAT CEN Table SUMMARY MAIN FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS Findings/challenges Recommendations Suggested responsible agencies and timeframe The business environment, Create regional and national COMIECO/Secretariat for including the regulatory programs improve the Central American Economic framework, one the main business environment and Integration (SIECA), ministries challenges for using digital regulatory framework using economy/trade, and services Central America e-government services and innovation agencies. and for digital business observatory good practices. development. Business Revise outdated laws and registration, taxes, access regulations, including tax finance, intellectual property regulations, that are obstacles protection, ride-sharing, e-commerce. Include data protection, consumer the regional e-commerce protection, cybersecurity, strategy the revision and regulations that have regulations for the digital not adapted the countries’ sector, including e-commerce, needs are the main challenges banking laws, fintech, for using digital services e-payments, ride-sharing Central America. legislation, commercial codes for the protection minorities, cybersecurity, data protection, digital consumer protection, competition policies, and intellectual property laws. There are many customs and The regional e-commerce logistical hurdles importing strategy should include and exporting products improving the enabling purchased online, including environment (that is, procedures high commissions for electronic and regulations for trade payments. logistics, such expedited shipments) and allowing for low-cost electronic payment mechanisms across borders. Entrepreneurs mention Improve e-government e-government agencies and all insufficient e-government services. First, reduce government institutions. and customer services unnecessary formalities and challenges. documents and promote Gov Medium term Tech entrepreneurial solutions improve central and municipal government services Create mutual recognition IDs facilitate opening bank accounts and business, promote data transfer facilitate migration while personal data protected. Digital service providers have Export promotion agencies Export promotion agencies. limited access markets. the region and embassies penetrate international abroad can play useful further Medium term markets, midsize and large role promoting digital service companies turn business providers world markets and associations and export with large buyers promotion agencies. Findings/challenges Recommendations Suggested responsible agencies and timeframe Digital service providers and Update the education and Ministries education other firms face challenges vocational curricula meet together with innovation recruiting relevant talent. the needs the digital industry agencies, ministries economy, and promote academy-industry universities, and business partnerships. important schools. facilitate the learning coding skills schools and universities Medium term for both men and women. Fewer women own businesses Increase the participation CENPROMYPE, ministries the digital sector. women training programs economy/MIPYME agencies, for SMEs and potential digital ministries science and start-ups, supporting digital technology, and innovation skills development. agencies. Short term Public policy does not favor the Consider formulating public Ministries economy and Central American technology policy support innovation innovation agencies. Industry. There are dynamic the technology industry. models that allow innovation first step, promote the Medium term and provide accompaniment, adoption standardized financial support, and monitoring and evaluation technology transfer that systems for entrepreneurship companies can reach point programs. Make firm-level where they can access credit data more widely available and support move forward with comparable indicators with autonomy. entrepreneurship the national and sub-national levels OVAT CEN INTRODUCTION OVAT CEN The digital ecosystem more important than chains, diversify products, reduce time market, and ever, not least because firms need digitalize create jobs. Technology-based start-ups can the their operations and sales adapt the center these dynamic trends productivity and post-COVID situation and reactivate economies. competitiveness. The promotion digital technologies necessary digitalize sales, marketing, and the transformation entrepreneurs and SMEs may production processes transform the supply chain also create opportunities for investments through and competitive. financial institutions. Central American countries, general, have The COVID-19 pandemic has jeopardized Central relatively low entry rate firms and low Americans’ livelihoods and welfare. The crisis innovation and technological upgrading. affecting the region employment, economic growth, Guatemala, Salvador, and Honduras, less than trade, foreign direct investment, productivity, and percent formal businesses are three years old the competitiveness certain value chains. The younger. Colombia percent) and Mexico percent) average unemployment rate Latin America and have higher proportions young firms. Costa Rica, the Caribbean, which was 8.1 percent the end percent formal firms report having introduced 2019, could rise between and percentage points. innovations their production processes; however, The severe contraction the United States the only percent formal firms Salvador report second quarter 2020 has affected Central America having done so. Less than percent manufacturing through trade. Central America economy shrank exports Honduras, Guatemala, and Salvador are estimated 6.1 percent 2020 (World Bank Group considered high tech, but 18.5 percent Costa Rican 2021). Sectors such textiles, manufacturing, tourism, manufacturing exports are considered high tech. and agriculture are most affected. Digital technologies can play crucial role this crucial time, the objective this report transforming SMEs, especially those most affected assess the entrepreneurship ecosystems for the crisis. Digital innovations are essential digital innovation Central America and provide reducing physical contact, improving access series recommendations strengthen regional and international markets, and increasing them, focused innovative digital providers investments. Strengthening the technology sector and, and the digitalization MSMEs. the request especially, opening opportunities for entrepreneurs CENPROMYPE, specialized agency from the Central and MSMEs use digital technology better their American Integration System (SICA), IFC, with the innovation and competitiveness vital for the region. support FIAS, prepared the Digital Innovation would open opportunities develop new value Entrepreneurship Central America project. OVAT CEN This project aims strengthen the ecosystem Besides the executive summary and this technology-enabled start-ups and MSMEs introduction, the document consists five improving the strategy and tools available sections. Section Methodology and Conceptual them and the policy and regulatory framework Framework, and section Entrepreneurship promote digital entrepreneurship and innovation Ecosystems Central America, borrow heavily from Central America, particularly for youth, women, and preliminary document prepared under the same strategic sectors. The program has two phases: (1) program Marcio Cruz and Jesica Torres with assessment and strategy the entrepreneurship key inputs from Gabriela Montenegro. Section ecosystem suppor technology-enabled Public Programs and Intermediary Organizations star t-ups and SMEs that innovate within their Central America, has been summarized from businesses using disruptive technologies and (2) the country reports drafted with the support strengthening the digital ecosystem and suppor Gabriela Montenegro. This section describes public for technology-enabled star t-ups and SMEs. programs and intermediary organizations supporting entrepreneurship four countries. Section Adoption emerging tech start-up ecosystem Central Technology, contains summary the findings America, which the IFC project aims boosting, and recommendations from focus groups with private could generate opportunities for angel investors, sector representatives and survey more than 2,000 seed funding, and venture capital funds. firms conducted Kati Suominen from Nextrade Group. Section provides policy recommendations. The document contains annexes with the names all IFC and other stakeholders can catalyze efforts stakeholders that have contributed this document, escalate Central America digital start-up detailed results from survey industries demanding ecosystems following best practices such technology, and detailed results from survey digital those used Buenos Aires, Tel Aviv, Boston, and service providers. Silicon Valley. Finally, important mention that there These regions have succeeded promoting are accompanying national reports. This networks among investors and entrepreneurs, document contains summary the team's work developing targeted financial instruments, four countries Central America: Costa Rica, improving the regulatory framework Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. The section expand markets, and linking businesses the adoption technology and recommendations science, technology, engineering, and also includes findings for Nicaragua and Panama, mathematics (STEM) education and digital countries included survey more than 2,000 skills programs (Senor and Singer 2009; World firms. Besides this regional report, there are four Bank 2018). other reports, one each for Costa Rica, Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. OVAT CEN METHODOLOGY AND CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK² ²Most this section contains extracts from draft document “Local Entrepreneurship Ecosystems Central America: Challenges and Opportunities Digital Technologies” (Cruz and Torres 2020), which was prepared Marcio Cruz and Jesica Torres with key inputs from Gabriela Montenegro under the IFC Digital Entrepreneurship Innovation program, led Mayra Alfaro Moran and Pedro Andres Amo. OVAT CEN This evaluation entrepreneurship ecosystems entrepreneurship support programs. The Central America uses multiple methods. Following context analysis provides snapshot the the approach proposed the World Bank (2019),³ entrepreneurship ecosystem, examines outcomes combines analysis firm-level micro-data, data (entry, scale-up, technology adoption) and pillars collected from quantitative analysis programs (supply factors, demand factors, and barriers), and support entrepreneurship, findings from focus groups, identifies geographical agglomerations businesses and the results survey more than 2,000 firms with the potential for additional growth (Figure 1). technology use. The support program analysis identifies gaps the entrepreneurship support programs offered the The assessment the digital entrepreneurship central government and intermediary organizations ecosystems Central America devise such incubators and accelerators. Audretsch, Cruz, metrics that help guide policy interventions and Torres (2020) provide the analytical framework for consists context analysis and analysis the assessment. Figure PILLARS AND THE PERFORMANCE THE ENTREPRENEURSHIP ECOSYSTEM ENTREPRENEURSHIP ECOSYSTEM Demand Supply Factors Accumulation/ for Factors (Inputs) Allocation Barriers Market Physical Capital Access Finance Firm Capabilities Human Capital Regulations Entrepreneurial Knowledge Capital Social Capital Characteristics and Culture Source: Cruz, Torres, and Tran 2020. Dynamic entrepreneurship ecosystems require production process takes place ecosystem—a entrepreneurial talent, access knowledge, geographical location (municipality, state, country) skilled labor, suitable physical infrastructure, characterized the quality entrepreneurship pillars and enablers that facilitate the optimal flow and entrepreneurship outcomes (Cruz, Torres, and resources from input markets into firms. Tran 2020). highly dynamic private sector where Entrepreneurs access resources input markets entrepreneurs easily enter and exit, profitable business (physical capital, intermediate goods, human capital, opportunities scale up, and firms consistently upgrade and knowledge), combine these resources, applying their technological infrastructure (see Figure their talents the production process, and sell requires (1) strong managerial capabilities, appetite the final goods services output markets. This for risk, and access markets (demand factors); (2) ³The overall methodology assessing entrepreneurship ecosystems used this study was designed and piloted the World Bank under the “New Measures Entrepreneurship” project, supported the Korea–World Bank Partnership Facility (KWPF). OVAT CEN the availability high-quality factors production proxy for the potential each ecosystem. (supply factors); and (3) the removal barriers that High-potential ecosystems exhibit agglomerations distort the flow resources from input markets more than one quality indicator, maturing ecosystems into firms, such restrictions access finance, exhibit agglomerations one quality indicator, and burdensome regulations, and cultural barriers incipient ecosystems exhibit quality agglomerations. entrepreneurship (for example, fear failure). Finally, the algorithm combines the 3×3 broad indicators diversity and quality into typology with The context analysis Central America nine categories (Cruz, Torres, and Tran 2020). evaluates the aggregate performance the entrepreneurship landscape relative regional this case, the firm-level data obtained not peers and identifies local entrepreneurship directly comparable across countries but rich ecosystems strategic industries. The analysis enough offer novel quantitative results. The first compares measures business creation, three databases presumably cover different segments scale-up firms, and adoption technology other the business size distribution. Nonetheless, rich regional peers and documents gaps the pillars enough allow the identification local ecosystems entrepreneurship using aggregate indicators supply and offer novel quantitative results. The records factors, demand factors, and barriers. The analysis then include the 4-digit International Standard Industrial identifies geographical agglomerations businesses Classification (ISIC) identifier for the economic within strategic industries value chains and measures activity, the locality where the business operates—a their potential using variety proxies for business municipality Honduras, Guatemala, and creation, business scale-up, and innovation. Salvador—and the age the business (the date when first registered with the administrative authority). The algorithm identify local entrepreneurship ecosystems evaluates the diversity geographical The analysis the mix mechanisms support agglomerations businesses and their potential entrepreneurship tries identify gaps public for additional growth. The method for identifying programs and intermediary organizations. The entrepreneurship ecosystems focuses critical assessment provides snapshot the main programs industries value chains and identifies agglomerations that support entrepreneurship. The diagnosis within industries across subsectors and quality collects data from public programs and intermediary indicators (Cruz, Torres, and Tran 2020). measure organizations such incubators, accelerators, diversity, the algorithm first looks for statistically and financial institutions using survey instruments significant agglomerations municipalities with developed specifically for this purpose. These surveys high density establishments within each 4-digit collect data such the services provided the public subsector the industry. then counts the number program intermediary organization, the mechanism subsectors for which municipality part intervention (for example, matching grant, credit agglomeration.⁴ The algorithm then sorts the guarantee, technology extension service), the indicator into three broader measures diversity: expected outcomes (entry, survival, scale-up), and agglomerations, agglomerations one subsector, the target beneficiaries. The data also include the and agglomerations more than one subsector. budget allocation and the number beneficiaries Similarly, measure potential quality, the algorithm across regions. first looks for agglomerations municipalities addition, following the same pillars for the measures business dynamism and the potential for entrepreneurial ecosystem, the team conducted additional growth within industry. The algorithm four national workshops (in Costa Rica, then counts the number quality indicators for Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras) and regional which municipality part agglomeration and one with key Central American actors. The purpose sorts them into three broader measures quality: these workshops was learn more about the quality agglomerations, agglomerations one quality supply and demand factors well barriers that indicator, and agglomerations more than one quality affect the ecosystem, especially those related indicator. The algorithm uses the quality indicator ⁴Following Felkner and Townsend (2011), the measure statistical significance Moran subsector the algorithm 4-digit ISIC subsector. CEP the digital sectors. The team also learned about the respondents. The online survey process differs from functionality the ecosystem and its support for the traditional survey process which the researcher development and adoption digital technologies for draws sample frame firms country and growth, productivity, and job creation. Participants then randomly selects firms from for what are provided many interesting recommendations, which typically phone interviews. The online survey method are incorporated section scalable and considerably more cost-effective than phone computer-assisted telephone interview Finally, get better understanding (CATI). Prior attempts combinations CATIs technology demand and supply, IFC⁵ conducted based sample frame and scalable online surveys two online surveys more than 2,000 firms from have resulted strikingly similar patterns firms’ October 2020 January 2021 Costa Rica, performance between the two sets (when comparing Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, firms the same size, sector, and geography). The and Panama. The first survey focused the use method also allowed more easily reaching firms that technologies, bringing together 1,906 responses from were not their physical offices and their phones the light manufacturing, business process outsourcing due COVID-19. (BPO), agribusiness, and financial services sectors. The survey was inspired and borrowed several There are some tradeoffs between online and questions from the Firm Adoption Technology (FAT) traditional sampling methods. Online surveys survey, designed Cirera, Comin, and Cruz (2020) inherently capture firms that are, least and described Cirera, Comin, Cruz, and Lee (2020). extent, digitized they can take the survey online The second survey focused the providers digital and have self-selected take survey about the services, totaling 209 firms across digital services use technology (thus likely going knowing sectors. These surveys seek enable policymakers something about technology use). Hence, the sample, the target countries, regional organizations, and extent, over-represents firms that are more the IFC rigorously assess the types technologies technology-intensive (and export-oriented, larger, and that firms the region growth sectors are adopting better performing). However, from experience, this and the technologies that digital entrepreneurs are does not markedly alter the general patterns firm developing locally. performance and technology adoption from what they are CATI survey drawn from sampling frame. The surveys leveraged online survey methods and online survey firm proprietary panel ⁴IFC hired Next Trade Group carry out the surveys and prepare the analysis, which provided many important findings and recommendations, most which are included this document. OVAT CEN ENTREPRENEURSHIP ECOSYSTEMS CENTRAL AMERICA MIE LDEN AEN NDEU CEP TNUA DLI OVAT ION RKI CEN Weak dynamism, limited capabilities scale up, and significant lags technology adoption characterize entrepreneurship Guatemala, Honduras, and Salvador. Central America exhibits comparatively weak rates business creation. Guatemala and Salvador, less than percent formal businesses are years less, and this fraction only 1.8 percent Honduras (Figure 2). Costa Rica, this fraction more than double that Honduras, but still bit far from Colombia percent) Mexico percent). Figure FRACTION YOUNG FIRMS (FORMAL BUSINESSES; 0-3 YEARS) rib tin Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey (own calculations). Central America, except for Costa Rica, also exhibits limited capabilities for business scale-up. Formal businesses Honduras, Guatemala, and Salvador increase their number employees rates lower than percent per year average, whereas businesses Costa Rica, Mexico, and Colombia grow rates that exceed percent (Figure 3). Formal businesses that survive least years are significantly smaller Honduras, Guatemala, and Salvador relative their regional peers (Figure 4). For example, formal firms Guatemala employ only workers after least years, much lower than the average Costa Rica and Mexico. Figure Figure ANNUAL EMPLOYMENT GROWTH FOR AVERAGE SIZE FORMAL FIRMS 20+ YEARS FORMAL FIRMS OLD (NUMBER WORKERS) ean rib rib tin tin Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey (own calculations). OVAT CEN The private sector Costa Rica shows significant innovation and R&D, contrary its neighbors Honduras, Guatemala, and Salvador. Costa Rica, percent formal firms report having introduced innovations their production process (Figure 5). However, only percent formal firms Salvador report doing so. Less than percent manufacturing exports Honduras, Guatemala, and Salvador are considered high tech (Figure 6), but Costa Rica manufacturing exports double this figure (18.5 percent). Less than percent businesses Central America spend R&D (Figure 7), third the fraction spent Costa Rica (37 percent). Figure Figure BUSINESSES THAT HAVE INTRODUCED HIGH-TECH EXPORTS (AS PERCENTAGE INNOVATIONS PRODUCTION MANUFACTURING EXPORTS) 21% 52% 18.5% 46% 40% 39% 34% 7.3% 27% 6.5% 25% 5.3% 14% 3.1% ean rib tin ntr Source: World Development Indicators. Note: High-tech exports are products with high element R&D such the Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey (own calculations). aerospace industry, computers, pharmaceuticals, and electric equipment. Figure BUSINESSES THAT SPEND R&D 37% 29% 21% 22% 12% 13% rib tin Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey (own calculations). ECO CEN Guatemala, Honduras, and Salvador also exhibit significant lags the pillars the entrepreneurship ecosystem. Gaps the pillars the entrepreneurship ecosystem Guatemala, Honduras, and Salvador relative regional peers mirror the performance the region entrepreneurship outcomes (Figure 8). The availability production factors—such physical capital, human capital, and knowledge—plays critical role innovative entrepreneurship ecosystem. However, relative their regional peers, Honduras and Guatemala produce with markedly less capital per worker. Moreover, only around percent the population ages more Guatemala, Honduras, and Salvador have completed tertiary degree, while Costa Rica this fraction more than percent (Figure 9). Less than percent these degrees are science and engineering (Figure 10). Figure PILLARS THE ENTREPRENEURSHIP ECOSYSTEM: CENTRAL AMERICA RELATIVE REGIONAL PEERS Physical capital Human capital Entrepreneurial talent Capabilities Knowledge Market access Access finance Social capital and culture Regulations Colombia Costa Rica Guatemala Honduras Mexico Salvador Source: Own calculations combining different indicators from World Bank Enterprise Survey; Entrepreneurship Survey and Database; International Comparison Program; World Development Indicators; Penn World Table 9.1; Global Innovation Index; Doing Business Indicators; and Global Entrepreneurship Monitor. Note: The figure shows average performance indicators supply factors (physical capital, human capital, and knowledge), demand factors (entrepreneurial talent, firm capabilities, and market access), and barriers (access finance, regulations, and culture) for Central America and regional peers. The raw indicators are converted into scale 0-100, where 100 assigned the best performing country. this chart, lines toward the outside indicate that country performing relatively well the nearest indicator, whereas lines toward the middle indicate that country performing relatively poorly the nearest indicator. OVAT CEN Financial barriers the flow resources into formal businesses Salvador have earned firms are binding constraints Central America. international quality certification. Costa Rica, there The average interest rate bank loans Honduras are almost 3.5 opportunity entrepreneurs for each (19.26) more than twice the average rate Mexico entrepreneur out necessity; this ratio around (7.34). The problem not merely that the average Guatemala and Salvador. interest rate bank loans high; financial institutions, moreover, not have the appetite for financing small Orienting policy interventions target specific businesses and entrepreneurs. Only around percent sectors and specific regions could accelerate formal firms Guatemala, Honduras, and Salvador convergence. Improving structural factors such have access loans credit lines with the banking human capital and access finance, while critical for sector, whereas this fraction exceeds percent growth the long term, gradual process, whereas Colombia. Consequently, entrepreneurs Central investments local entrepreneurship ecosystems America get loans with pawnshops non-regulated could accelerate convergence and lead higher gains financial entities, some them very informal, that tend productivity. Thus, critical identify the areas provide extremely expensive credit individuals with higher potential for entrepreneurship provide and SMEs. These costly loans combined with lack focal interventions that address challenges that are skills manage business (including inadequate sector- and region-specific. financial knowledge) are important reasons why many Sections 3.1 3.5 present analysis the entrepreneurships are unsuccessful. entrepreneurship ecosystem Central America Regulatory barriers also hamper entrepreneurship based rich database compiled from many countries. Starting formal business anonymized administrative records. Salvador, Honduras takes, average, more than days. these records cover mainly large formal businesses Salvador, registering property takes, average, measured workers per business, sales per least days. only takes around days Costa business, assets per business. The database for Rica, though. Guatemala more comprehensive, with almost 1.7 million businesses, whereas the database for Honduras Demand pillars such managerial and covers relatively fewer and smaller firms. The data entrepreneurial capabilities, combined with access made available the team regarding Costa Rica does national and international markets, are key. Yet, not contain variables that would help measure the gaps these fundamentals the entrepreneurship potential ecosystems; for this reason, Costa Rica ecosystem the region mirror gaps the supply not included these sections. pillars and the barriers. Only around percent Figure Figure 10. POPULATION 25+ WITH GRADUATES SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING TERTIARY EDUCATION (OF THE TOTAL NUMBER GRADUATES FROM TERTIARY EDUCATION) 25.2% 22.2% 23.1% 21.3% 21.4% 16.4% 15.2% 15.5% 9.7% 9.8% 8.5% Source: World Development Indicators. Source: Global Innovation Index. ECO CEN 3.1. LOC ENTREPRENEURSHIP ECOSYSTEMS The analysis spatial correlations economic activity Honduras, Guatemala, and Salvador exploits anonymized records from administrative databases from ministries economy and tax authorities. (See Table 2.) The data not directly comparable across countries but rich enough offer novel quantitative results. The three databases presumably cover different segments the business size distribution. For example, whereas the average number employees per business the data for Honduras 4.6, the average size the data for Salvador 29.2. Similarly, sales per business the data are around USD 21,000 for Honduras, USD 53,000 Guatemala, and USD 1.7 million Salvador. Nonetheless, the data rich enough allow the identification local ecosystems and offer novel quantitative results. The records include the 4-digit ISIC identifier for the economic activity, the locality where the business operates—a municipality Honduras, Guatemala, and Salvador—and the age the business (the date when was first registered with the administrative authority). Table CHARACTERISTICS THE DATABASES ANALYZED IDENTIFY LOCAL ECOSYSTEMS CENTRAL AMERICA Honduras Guatemala Salvador Agency Source SENPRENDE SAT DIGESTYC (Ministry Economy) Year 2018 2018 2014–18 Number businesses 4,415 1,673,477 23,057 Average size (number workers) 4.6 29.2 Average wagea 4,000 Sales per business 20,914 52,876 1,703,700 Assets per business 119,652 2,676,700 Profits per business 1,298 Note: Yearly figures USD. Guatemala and Honduras, the figures use the exchange rate for January 2020. The firm-level data Honduras, Guatemala, and potential are the number young firms (0–3 years), the Salvador contains sales records and other variables average number workers per business, the average that proxy for the productivity the business assets per business, and the average sales per worker. and help measure the potential geographical ecosystems. The algorithm measure the potential The analysis local ecosystems considers industries entrepreneurship ecosystems exploits indicators that are strategic terms their potential business dynamism and potential for additional boosting productivity growth and that represent growth. For Honduras, these indicators are the number significant fraction employment Central young businesses the municipality (0–4 years), America. The algorithm identify entrepreneurship the average sales per business, the average number ecosystems identifies spatial agglomerations within workers per business, and the average sales per worker. industry value chain. Central America, the analysis Guatemala, the quality indicators are the number centers strategic industries: the digital sector and young firms (0–4 years), the average sales per business, high-tech manufacturing; tradable services such the average assets per business, and the average wage tourism, financial services, and BPO; and traditional bill per business. For Salvador, the indicators industries such agribusiness and light manufacturing.⁶ The digital sector includes manufacturing and repair computers and telecommunications equipment, retail and wholesale computers, programming activities, publishing and broadcasting activities, and data processing (Barefoot al. 2018). High-tech manufacturing the industry responsible for producing technology products with high element R&D, such aerospace products, chemicals, plastics, pharmaceuticals, electrical equipment, electronics, motors, and medical and optical instruments (Wolf and Terrell 2016). Tourism includes accommodation services, entertainment activities, food preparation services, and air transportation. Financial services combine financial activities, insurance, and pension services, and BPO includes call centers, management consulting, and administrative support activities. Agribusiness combines agriculture and food processing. Finally, light manufacturing includes textiles, apparel, leather, wood products, and metal products (Dinh al. 2012 and Dinh 2014). OVAT CEN 3.2. DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND HIGH-TECH MANUFACTURING Businesses the digital sector and high-tech manufacturing Central America are potentially more productive than the average firm. Businesses digital technologies account for relatively small share observations percent Guatemala and percent Honduras and Salvador). Still, the productivity their labor substantially larger than that the average business. Sales per worker Salvador are 4.5 times the sales per worker the average business, and Guatemala, the average wage bill digital businesses 2.4 times the wage bill the average business (Table 3). Similarly, high-tech manufacturing accounts for small fraction businesses the region percent Honduras and Salvador and only 0.5 percent Guatemala), but the productivity those firms potentially large. Average sales per business the industry are 2.5 times the sales the average business Salvador and almost times the sales the average business Guatemala. Table CHARACTERISTICS BUSINESSES THE DATA THE DIGITAL SECTOR AND HIGH-TECH MANUFACTURING Fraction Fraction Sales per Fraction Sales per women-owned Country Industry firms firma employment workera firms Digital 1.8 2.4 23% Sector Guatemalab High-tech 8.7 9.7 23% manufacturing Digital 0.6 1.0 47% Sector Honduras High-tech 1.1 0.5 55% manufacturing Digital 1.2 4.5 27% Sector Salvador High-tech 2.5 0.8 33% manufacturing Note: Sales per firm and sales per worker are relative the average plant the data. Guatemala, the fraction employment the fraction the total wage bill (because employment per plant not available), and sales per worker corresponds the relative wage bill. the data, fewer women own businesses the digital sector and high-tech manufacturing relative other industries. Salvador, percent businesses digital technologies are owned women, compared the average percent across industries the data. Guatemala, percent businesses digital technologies and percent businesses high-tech manufacturing are owned women, compared the average across industries percent the data. Moreover, whereas women account for percent the employment the data Salvador, the fraction women employees high-tech manufacturing only percent. The digital sector the region seems exhibit more dynamism relative businesses other economic activities. The data for Salvador contains identifiers that track the business over time and help examine the flows formal businesses and out the economy. average, 6.5 percent formal digital businesses Salvador will exit, and 7.4 percent digital businesses will enter given year (Figure 11). Moreover, digital enterprises exit faster rate relative other industries (6.5 vs. 5.1), but they also enter relatively faster pace (7.4 vs. 6.1). Digital enterprises that survived between 2014 and 2018 Salvador became significantly more productive—sales per ECO CEN hour worked surviving digital businesses increased per digital business high-potential ecosystems percent the 5-year period (Figure 12), whereas Salvador average USD 1.8 million per year, and only productivity surviving businesses other industries around 183,000 Guatemala and 21,500 Honduras. seems have remained relatively the same. The region exhibits other digital agglomerations the north Guatemala, the west Honduras, and San High-potential entrepreneurs digital Miguel Salvador, but these agglomerations seem technologies mainly agglomerate the capital the early stages development. cities the region. The capitals Guatemala and Salvador exhibit significant densities businesses Most production high-tech manufacturing digital technologies. These high-potential the region seems take place geographical agglomerations account for around percent agglomerations. Santa Ana, Libertad, San businesses Honduras and Guatemala and almost Salvador, and Paz Salvador have maturing percent businesses Salvador. Most digital high-potential entrepreneurship ecosystems businesses Salvador operate geographical high-tech manufacturing. Similarly, several agglomerations (93 percent businesses the departments across Honduras seem exhibit industry), whereas Honduras and Guatemala, close significant agglomerations the industry, for third businesses the data operate locations example, Atlántida, Yoro, Comayagua, and Olancho. without significant densities businesses the Guatemala, only the department Guatemala and industry. Businesses high-potential ecosystems the north Escuintla exhibit agglomerations both the data for Salvador are significantly larger than diversity and quality. digital businesses Honduras and Guatemala—sales Figure 11. Figure 12. YEARLY RATE ENTRY AND EXIT SALES PER WORKER-HOUR (AVERAGE FOR 2014–18) AMONG FIRMS SURVIVING 2014–18a (USD) 56.6 7.4% 6.5% 6.1% 39.4 5.1% 29.6 28.7 Other Digital 2014 2018 2014 2018 industries economy Other Digital industries economy Entry rate Exit rate Source: Own calculations using DIGESTYC panel data. Note: Sales per worker-hour are computed sales per worker divided 2,080 hours (assuming typical work week hours). The analysis considers only Source: Own calculation using DIGESTYC panel data. surviving businesses between 2014 and 2018. OVAT CEN 3.3. ADABLE SERVICES: TOURISM, FINANCIAL SERVICES, AND BPO Globally, for both firms the services industry for percent the employment the data for and individual entrepreneurs, digitalization Salvador and percent the employment recorded largely takes three forms. One the digitalization for Honduras (see Table 4). The average fraction knowledge-intensive business services such women employed the industry high compared financial services and business process outsourcing. the average—in Salvador, percent the The second e-commerce, such booking and employees the industry are women, whereas paying for tourism services. The third enabling this fraction percent the average business. new business models, including marketing via social High-potential ecosystems tourism the data media, online customer feedback, hyper-personalized account for around percent businesses services, self-service, the sharing economy, and virtual Honduras and percent businesses Guatemala reality. All three have the potential expand the and Salvador. These agglomerations are the markets and revenues individual entrepreneurs and department Guatemala Guatemala; Libertad, services firms. Evidence suggests that digital tourism, San Salvador, and San Miguel Salvador; and for example, has positive effect gross domestic several municipalities across Honduras. Honduras and product (e.g., Watkins al. 2018). Salvador exhibit few geographical agglomerations addition these high-potential ecosystems. Tourism accounts for significant fraction the contrary, Guatemala exhibits incipient ecosystems the employment the data and employs tourism across the country, and around half comparatively high fraction women. Diversity the businesses the industry not operate and quality tourism the region mainly geographical agglomerations. agglomerated the capital cities. Tourism accounts ECO CEN Table CHARACTERISTICS BUSINESSES THE DATA TOURISM, FINANCIAL SERVICES, AND BPO Fraction Sales per Fraction Sales per Fraction Country Industry firms firma employment worker women-owned firms Tourism 11% 0.3 0.3 32% Financial 4.8 7.9 34% Guatemalab services BPO 20% 0.2 0.4 40% Tourism 0.6 0.5 56% Financial Honduras services 0.2 11% 0.4 22% BPO 0.1 0.3 69% Tourism 0.8 1.4 36% Salvador Financial 2.0 4.6 50% services BPO 0.4 0.4 50% Note: Sales per firm and sales per worker are relative the average plant the data. Guatemala, the fraction employment the fraction the total wage bill (because employment per plant not available), and sales per worker corresponds the relative wage bill. Financial services account for low fraction Salvador has two BPO ecosystems: businesses the data, and most are agglomerated Libertad-San Salvador metropolitan area and San high-potential ecosystems. The proxies for Miguel. Guatemala exhibits only one ecosystem productivity for businesses financial services the industry the department Guatemala. the region are quite high relative the average. The BPO industry accounts for percent the Salvador, sales per business the industry are businesses the data Guatemala, although their times the sales the average business, and sales per wage bill percent the wage bill the average worker are 4.6 times the sales the average worker. business, and sales per business are percent the Guatemala, sales per business the industry are sales the average business. Salvador, the 4.8 times the sales the average business, and the industry accounts for percent employment average wage bill the industry times the wage the data, and percent businesses are owned bill the average business. Honduras, the industry women. Honduras, the industry accounts for accounts for percent businesses but percent only businesses. Most businesses the industry the employment the database. The departments agglomerate ecosystems Libertad-San Guatemala Guatemala, San Salvador Salvador, Salvador and San Miguel Salvador and the and Olancho Honduras exhibit high-potential department Guatemala Guatemala. Yet, almost agglomerations financial services. Businesses percent businesses the industry Guatemala these ecosystems markedly differ across countries–sales not produce geographical agglomerations. per business high-potential ecosystems financial services average USD 3.4 million Salvador, USD 261,000 Guatemala, and around USD 4,000 Honduras. OVAT CEN 3.4. AGRIBUSINESS AND LIGHT MANUFACTURING Agribusiness accounts for significant fraction scattered across Central America, and most businesses employment the data. Agglomerations the the industry operate these agglomerations (92 industry are scattered across the region. Agribusiness percent Honduras, percent Guatemala, and accounts for percent employment the Honduras percent Salvador). Honduras does not exhibit data and percent employment the data for high-potential agglomerations. Guatemala, the Salvador (see Table 5). Guatemala, sales per business departments Guatemala, Escuintla, and Zacapa exhibit the industry are 3.2 times the sales the average high-potential agglomerations agribusinesses, and business, and the wage bill 4.1 times the average these agglomerations account for 1.3 percent business wage bill. Salvador, the average firm the industry the data. Salvador, the high-potential ecosystems employs workers, twice the size the average Sonsonate, Libertad, San Vicente agglomerate 3.4 business the data. Agglomerations agribusiness are percent businesses the data. Table CHARACTERISTICS BUSINESSES THE DATA AGRIBUSINESS AND LIGHT MANUFACTURING Fraction Fraction Sales per Fraction Sales per women-owned Country Industry firms firma employment workera firms Agribusiness 3.2 19% 4.1 23% Guatemalab Light 2.1 3.3 24% manufacturing Agribusiness 36% 0.7 38% 0.8 56% Honduras Light 0.3 0.5 43% manufacturing Agribusiness 1.7 12% 0.6 15% Salvador Light 4.3 14% 0.5 38% manufacturing Note: Sales per firm and sales per worker are relative the average plant the data. Guatemala, the fraction employment the fraction the total wage bill (because employment per plant not available), and sales per worker corresponds the relative wage bill. Light manufacturing accounts for relatively the sales the average business Salvador, 2.1 small fraction businesses the data, but times Guatemala, and only 0.3 times Honduras. Salvador, the industry accounts for the largest Guatemala, the average wage bill the industry 3.3 employers and employs relatively high fraction times the wage bill the average business. Honduras, women. Production light manufacturing the industry accounts for percent businesses, more mainly agglomerated the departments Guatemala than twice the fraction the data for Guatemala and Guatemala and Libertad Salvador and Salvador. Salvador, percent employees scattered across the north Honduras. Businesses the industry are women, high fraction relative the light manufacturing account for percent average across industries percent. Diversity and employment Salvador but only percent quality light manufacturing are mainly agglomerated businesses. The average size firms the industry Cortes, Atlantida, Yoro, and Olancho Honduras; the 216, around seven times the size the average department Guatemala Guatemala; and Santa Ana, business the data. Sales per business are 4.3 times Libertad, and San Salvador Salvador. ECO CEN 3.5. SUMMARY HIGH-POTENTIAL LOCAL ECOSYSTEMS CENTRAL AMERICA High-potential ecosystems, general, grow near capital cities Central America. High-potential businesses Guatemala mainly agglomerate the Guatemala and Escuintla departments (Table 6). Salvador, they mainly agglomerate San Salvador and Libertad. Honduras, Comayagua has high-potential agglomerations across several industries. Capital cities Central America concentrate larger share the urban population than reported official figures. Cities contribute more than percent the regional economy. Urban areas offer better jobs, higher wages, better access safe drinking water, and shorter distances health care facilities (Maria al. 2017). Broadband penetration lower rural areas (ITU 2020), limiting the digital connectivity firms. Table REGIONS WITH MATURING AND HIGH-POTENTIAL ECOSYSTEMS ACROSS INDUSTRIES Industry Maturing High potential Digital technologies Guatemala High-tech manufacturing Escuintla; Guatemala Tourism Sacatepequez Guatemala Guatemala Financial services Santa Rosa Guatemala BPO Guatemala Agribusiness Quetzaltenango Escuintla; Guatemala; Zacapa; Guatemala Escuintla; Guatemala; Light manufacturing Sacatepequez Atlantida; Comayagua; Digital technologies Lempira Olancho; Yoro High-tech Copan; Cortes; Lempira; manufacturing Valle Atlantida; Yoro Atlantida; Paraiso; Comayagua; Copan; Tourism Paz; Olancho Lempira; Santa Barbara Honduras Financial services Yoro Copan; Ocotepeque BPO Cortes Olancho; Yoro Copan; Paraiso; Agribusiness Lempira; Olancho Valle Atlantida; Choluteca; Comayagua; Copan; Light manufacturing Paraiso; Lempira; Cortes; Intibuca; Olancho; Ocotepeque Santa Barbara; Yoro Digital technologies San Salvador High-tech Libertad; Paz; Santa Ana; Sonsonate San Salvador manufacturing Libertad; San Miguel; Tourism San Salvador Salvador Financial services San Miguel Libertad; San Salvador Libertad; San Miguel; BPO San Salvador Cabanas; Libertad; San Salvador; Agribusiness Chalatenango;La Union; San Vicente; Sonsonate Morazan; San Miguel Libertad; San Salvador; Light manufacturing Paz Santa Ana OVAT CEN PUBLIC PROGRAMS AND INTERMEDIARY ORGANIZATIONS CENTRAL AMERICA TIR TAEP TEU PEU ECO PTA YIS INN CEN OVAT NAIM CEN Costa Rica, Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras Public programs are focused managerial support entrepreneurship and digital development training and access finance. (See Figure 13.) through more than 241 public programs. The report However, explained later the document, many assessed 118 these programs. entrepreneurs still face barriers accessing finance. Public programs support Costa Rican firms increase Few programs provide incubation services for digital transformation and e-commerce through digital and innovation entrepreneurship. the 118 digital diagnostics, customized postal services, seed programs assessed, only programs provide holistic capital, and grants. PROCOMER, Costa Rica national incubation services for digital entrepreneurs, follows: investment and export promotion agency, actively Costa Rica: Agencia Universitaria para Gestión del supports Costa Rican information technology (IT) firms Emprendimiento (AUGE), Centro Emprendimiento accessing foreign markets. Public programs Costa Innovación Universidad para Cooperación Rica are focused mainly business acceleration and Internacional (CEI-UCI), Cámara Comercio Costa scale-up. Salvador, public programs are focused Rica, Parque Tec, Tec Emprende Lab. providing equipment, managerial training, and market access. Very few programs offer technology extension Guatemala: Campus Tec, Progreso University del services, early-stage advisory, support adopt Valle Guatemala, University San Carlos. technology general. Guatemala, the government Honduras: Honduras Digital Challenge, HUB UNITEC promotes entrepreneurship through interventions (Universidad Tecnológica Centroamericana). support science, technology and innovation, These programs cover services such co-working education and training, and access finance. Most spaces, mentoring, product and service development, public programs focus businesses early phases, links early-stage financing, and access markets. younger than three years. Honduras, the government Only the Ministry Communications, Innovation and supports entrepreneurship development through Technology Costa Rica maintains official registry various programs part its economic policy, science, incubators that support technology-based new technology and innovation, education and training, and firms. Annex provides the complete list programs market access initiatives. Public programs are focused country. Annex presents the list and details the mainly early-stage firms, firm scale-up, and access programs that responded the questionnaires. foreign markets.⁷ Figure 13. MAIN SERVICES PROVIDED PUBLIC PROGRAMS Number Programs Costa Rica Salvador Guatemala Honduras Regional ties ork tio ili ctu hin ion fin rat lla Source: World Bank Entrepreneurship Enabler Survey 2020. Note: The line labeled “Regional” the sum responses from Costa Rica, Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. The survey was based the World Bank Entrepreneurship Enabler Survey (World Bank 2019) for analyzing public programs and intermediary organizations supporting entrepreneurship. OVAT CEN Most intermediary organizations Central mindset, business education, network collaboration, America are incubators accelerators primarily services for market access, and trade fairs. Half focused managerial training and capacity the intermediary organizations provide technology building for businesses the early stages. (See adoption services and offer co-working spaces and Figure 14.) Supporting institutions Costa Rica incubation and acceleration programs. Supporting are primarily accelerators that target businesses institutions Honduras represent wide variety early phases and seek increase skills improve organizations that are part the ecosystem. Most productivity. Institutions represent accelerators, consider themselves public-private institutions. Most incubators, academic centers, and business associations. intermediary organizations operate accelerators and Targeted beneficiaries are individual entrepreneurs incubators. Academic research and entrepreneurship and firms early phases. Salvador, most centers are actively represented the ecosystem. Most institutions are incubators accelerators that offer intermediary organizations support the early stages managerial and professional training for entrepreneurs, business development. They have incubation and collaborative networks, and early-stage advisory. Over acceleration services, including co-working spaces, half them offer technology extension services. early-stage infrastructure, and advisory services. Guatemala, most organizations support entrepreneurial Figure 14. MAIN SERVICES PROVIDED SUPPORTING ORGANIZATIONS Costa Rica Number programs Salvador Guatemala Honduras Regional tio iti til fin tio Source: World Bank Entrepreneurship Enabler Survey 2020. Note: The line labeled “Regional” the sum responses from Costa Rica, Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. However, access finance still underserved Guatemala, only few intermediary organizations area most countries Central America. provide financing support, such grants/vouchers, Intermediary organization program managers equity finance, credit guarantees, and loans. Costa Rica agree with public policy officials that the Honduras, most intermediary organizations provide main barrier entrepreneurship access finance. variety enterprise development services, but only Although there are various intermediary organizations programs integrate access finance part offering access finance, Costa Rica, only their programs. These intermediary organizations intermediary organizations report supporting integrate access finance, through grants, equity businesses through equity finance. Salvador, only finance, and credit guarantees, with incubation and intermediary organizations report supporting scale-up services. businesses through access finance. Likewise, CEN More detailed comparable information the (See Figure 15.) Costa Rica, public programs and effectiveness different approaches digital intermediary organizations aligned resources support start-ups necessary. The analysis program MSMEs through technical assistance and some access information conducted this study limited the finance. The government Costa Rica also supported general characteristics programs. Only percent firms through FoPYme and the Development Bank programs surveyed reported conducting impact System through seed capital, grants, and subsidized evaluations. Knowing and sharing information about loans. Intermediary organizations report that they have the effectiveness programs the ecosystem can provided support comply with COVID-19 sanitary enhance high-impact interventions support start-ups protocols and managerial training. Guatemala, through effective tools and methodologies. For supporting the adoption digital solutions priority example, the main service provided public programs for the COVID-19 response. Intermediary organizations and intermediary organizations managerial training. have adapted managerial training and strengthened would valuable learn about the effectiveness support adopt digital solutions. Honduras, public these programs among different target groups. the policy officials and intermediary organization program same manner, would helpful learn about the managers agree that the most-needed support for effectiveness early-stage financial support (grants businesses alleviate the impact COVID-19 related and seed capital) for start-ups. more flexible terms for debt. Although there have been adaptations from the countries, most companies Recently, due COVID-19, most countries are have stated that they need support training for aligning their programs adapt technologies digital solutions, deferral credit payments, deferral and comply with sanitary protocols, but they need mortgage and rent payments, and new subsidized loans. lot support and training digital solutions. Figure 15. MOST-NEEDED SUPPORT FOR MSMES’ RECOVERY DURING COVID-19: RESPONSES PUBLIC PROGRAMS AND INTERMEDIARY ORGANIZATIONS Number responses iti ita Costa Rica Guatemala Honduras Regional Source: WBG Surveys Public Policy Instruments and supporting organizations. August- December 2020. Note: The regional data labeled “Regional” the sum responses from Costa Rica, Guatemala and Honduras. The survey for Salvador was launched earlier and did not include COVID-19 related questions. The remainder this section summarizes the government programs and private and non-governmental organizations that are available support entrepreneurs each country the region. OVAT CEN 4.1. GOVERNMENT PROGR AMS SUPPORTING ENTREPRENEURSHIP Postal Services, Correos Costa Rica, supports COSTA RIC MSME e-commerce logistics and e-commerce delivery through the PYME-Express program, while The Government Costa Rica supports enterprise the National Institute for Women implements two development through various programs part programs promote technology adoption among its economic policy, science, technology and women entrepreneurs through Ramp-Up and innovation, education and training, and market Seedstars Costa Rica. The National Development access initiatives. The main services provided Banking System complements these efforts through entrepreneurs and MSMEs are market access and grants, seed capital, equity finance, loans, and support comply with regulations. The largest part guarantees. MSMEs can access these services through the reported public policy programs devoted first-tier financial institutions. access finance and incentives through established funds promote entrepreneurial innovation, adoption PROCOMER, the national investment and export technologies, and human capital, about USD 3.3 promotion agency, actively supports Costa Rican million for 2019. The assessment includes information firms accessing foreign markets. PROCOMER from six government programs. prioritizes digital services and supports firms with market research, demand alerts, sector-specific Public programs support Costa Rican firms advisory services, trade promotion, and participation increase digital transformation and e-commerce trade fairs. Their approach help exporters reduce through digital diagnostics (Chequeo Digital), the competitiveness gaps. Currently, PROCOMER customized postal services, seed capital, and implements program for digital services exporters grants. The Ministry Science, Technology and close gaps compete the United States digital Telecommunications (MICIT), coordination with services market. Entrepreneurs regard PROCOMER the Ministry Economy, Investment and Trade the most effective government agency Costa Rica. (MEIC), maintains the Small and Medium Enterprise Support Program (PROPYME) devoted promoting Public programs Costa Rica focus mainly innovation and technological development among business acceleration and scale-up. Most programs MSMEs. MICIT also maintains official registry are accelerators, focused firms’ early phases incubators that support new technology-based firms. 1–3 years. Target beneficiaries are, and large, MEIC started implement the Digital MSME program, enterprises more than two workers, and over half based the Digital Check methodology, developed the programs have sector orientation, while the the InterAmerican Development Bank. This digital rest target services, services, and manufacturing. tool assesses the capacities MSMEs and provides roadmap for digital transformation. The National CEN the main expected outcomes. One program (run SALVADOR the Ministry Economy) targets businesses services, and two target businesses Salvador, programs administered the manufacturing; the rest the programs reported Ministry Economy mainly target gaps the surveys had sectoral orientation. More recently, supply pillars, whereas programs run the the Ministry Economy started supporting digital National Micro and Small Business Commission transformation through Digital Check, with the (CONAMYPE) mainly target gaps the demand support the InterAmerican Development Bank; pillars. The survey covers eight programs run the E-Pyme acceleration program develop CONAMYPE, four programs run the Development e-commerce capacities among MSMEs; Skills the Bank Salvador (BANDESAL), and three programs Cloud with the support Amazon Web Services run the Ministry Economy. Nine these develop cloud computing skills among STEM programs are run women (four BANDESAL students; and E-Lancers promote information and five CONAMYPE). BANDESAL mainly offers and communication technology (ICT) freelancers’ support access equipment (supply pillar), support participation global platforms. part the access finance (barrier), and managerial training response COVID-19, the Government Salvador (demand pillar). contrast, CONAMYPE seems established USD 600 million economic recovery oriented toward closing gaps the demand pillars fund support MSMEs through loans, subsidies, and the entrepreneurship ecosystem, whereas the credit the informal sector. Ministry Economy seems target supply pillars. Most resources seem allocated support access equipment and the development managerial GUATEMAL capabilities; support adopt technology receives only around USD 8,000 per year. Nine public programs are The Government Guatemala promotes oriented toward established businesses have age entrepreneurship through interventions support orientation, whereas six mainly specialize start-ups science, technology and innovation, education (0–3 years). and training, and access finance. The Ministry Economy the leading government institution May 2020, very few programs offered implementing and coordinating interventions. Programs BANDESAL, CONAMYPE, and the Ministry focus mainly business scale-up, skills development, Economy offer technology extension and job creation. Most programs focus businesses services, early-stage advisory, support early phases below three years existence. Over adopt technology general. Around half the half the programs have sector orientation, public programs surveyed support the creation while the other half target agriculture, handcrafts, businesses, and only two support R&D and the and manufacturing. Target beneficiaries are, and adoption diffusion technology. The main services large, individual entrepreneurs. public program provided are associated with access machinery, specifically focuses digital technologies digital equipment, material inputs; access markets transformation. The assessment includes information (both national and international); and managerial from government programs. and professional training for entrepreneurs. Most programs offer business education and networking events and other activities promote collaboration the ecosystem. Only two offer technology extension services, and only one offers early-stage infrastructure advisory. Only four programs report the adoption new technologies one OVAT CEN Honduras, public programs offer variety HONDUR services and links financial instruments and focus mainly early-stage firms, firm scale-up, The Government Honduras supports enterprise and access foreign markets. Services for development through various programs enterprise development included managerial skills, part its economic policy, science, technology networks and markets, and technology adoption, and and innovation, education and training, and three them also link access finance, providing market access initiatives. Consistent with the grants, seed capital, equity finance, and loans and importance the agribusiness sector Honduras, credit. Most programs are focused early phases, the Secretariat Agriculture has the highest budget firms less than one year old, and those 1–3 years among public programs. The Honduran Institute old. Target beneficiaries are, and large, individual Science, Technology and Innovation (IHCIETI) and entrepreneurs, and over half the programs have the Secretarial for Economic Development (SDE) play sector orientation, while the rest target agriculture, important roles supporting enterprise development. handcrafts, and manufacturing. The National Service for Entrepreneurship and Small Business (SENPRENDE), which serves the MSME general, even though there are public programs coordination system under SDE, responsible for supporting entrepreneurship, not much effort coordination among the Honduran government and devoted scaling them strategically widely SBDCs promote policies and improve capacities for sharing information about the effectiveness micro and small businesses. SENPRENDE coordinates programs and the fit between the program SBDCs Honduras. The main areas support that contents and the needs beneficiaries. Efforts public programs provide entrepreneurs aim help design and coordinate policies and capacity-building them comply with current regulations and food and programs need trigger dynamism the safety protocols. Other areas include support access entrepreneurship ecosystem. This dynamism should financing, market access, and managerial training. measurable terms the number start-ups, SENPRENDE, with the support CENPROMYPE, the number technologies implemented, MSME coordinating train the trainers program develop innovation ventures, capital investments, and loans the capacities SBDCs e-commerce. addition and the ability MSMEs repay them. SENPRENDE, the other three public programs report training and technical support digital solutions for businesses. The assessment includes information from nine government programs. CEN 4.2. INTERMEDIARY ORGANIZ ATIONS SUPPORTING ENTREPRENEURSHIP beneficiaries are individual entrepreneurs and firms COSTA RIC early phases (less than one year and 1–3 years). Most intermediary organizations have sector orientation, Intermediary organizations that contributed this and others focus manufacturing, services, study Costa Rica provide variety enterprise agriculture, and services other than IT. Over half development services. Most are primarily focused the intermediary organizations reported promoting managerial training and capacity building, but also increased skills for productivity primary outcome. collaborative networks and markets, access finance The main services offered intermediary organizations through equity finance, technology adoption, research are managerial training, promoting entrepreneurial and development, and gender inclusion. The assessment culture, and market access. includes information from organizations. Four them are registered incubators that provide services Access finance underserved area Costa new technology-based firms. Among the intermediary Rica. Intermediary organization program managers organizations that reported information this study, agree with public officials that the main barriers Parque Tec notable because its holistic approach entrepreneurship are access finance and managerial developing digital entrepreneurs (Box 1). capabilities. However, only organizations support businesses through equity finance. Digital Intermediary organizations Costa Rica that entrepreneurs report obtaining venture capital from responded this study are primarily accelerators foreign acceleration programs. From the private sector that target businesses early phases and seek point view, lack collaboration among actors the increase skills improve productivity. Intermediary ecosystem and access markets are also important organizations include accelerators, incubators, barriers. academic centers, and business associations. Targeted Box PARQUE TEC INVERT-UP Costa Rica, Parque Tec and Invert-Up are regional best practices that implement state-of-the-art acceleration programs for digital entrepreneurs. Parque Tec helps entrepreneurs build and scale their start-ups with emphasis raising equity investment. provides business coaching; strategic and innovation management; accounting tracking platform; networking and strategic alliances; workshops finance, marketing, and customer development; access investors, financial institutions, and boards directors; and physical space, office services, and connectivity. The program links international accelerators and investment vehicles. Through Invert-Up (equity finance), start-ups receive mentoring and investments. Parque Tec and Invert-Up integrate diversified portfolio start-ups, minimizing the risk for investors and generating clear strategies for entrepreneurs. Invert-Up the first investment vehicle the Central American region that allows the investor settle the shares acquired through private offering shares the National Stock Exchange Costa Rica, ensuring transparency and international best practices. OVAT CEN SALVADOR GUATEMAL Salvador, intermediary organizations 2019, intermediary organizations mainly target gaps the demand pillars the managed USD 4.2 million budget support entrepreneurship ecosystem. The analysis entrepreneurship Guatemala. Their main intermediary organizations covers institutions: objectives were help create and scale four are research educational organizations businesses and build the entrepreneurship ecosystem (three which also help both incubate and Guatemala. These organizations support accelerate businesses), one incubator only, entrepreneurial mindset, business education, network four are accelerators only, five both incubate and collaboration, services for market access, and accelerate businesses, one not-for-profit advisory trade fairs. Half the intermediary organizations organization, and one industry association. provide technology adoption services, and about However, none these programs seems incubate offer co-working spaces and incubation and tech entrepreneurs. Six organizations were founded acceleration programs. Only few organizations before 2010, and only five started operations provide financing support, such grants vouchers, after 2015. Only four organizations are managed equity finance, credit guarantees, and loans. Five woman. Most intermediary organizations the intermediary organizations implement offer managerial and professional training for holistic approach entrepreneurship supporting entrepreneurs, work strengthen collaboration access finance (grants, private equity, credit the ecosystem, and work change mindsets guarantees), incubation and scale-up services, and concerning entrepreneurship Salvador. addition collaborative networks. The assessment identified these services, most resources seem allocated four programs that provide incubation services support businesses complying with regulations. new technology-based firms: Campus Tec, Progreso Eight supporting organizations are oriented toward University San Carlos, and University Del Valle. established businesses have age orientation, both Guatemala and Honduras, intermediary whereas seven mainly target start-ups (0–3 years). organizations serve variety beneficiaries Slightly over half surveyed intermediary and sector orientations. Most organizations organizations Salvador offer technology consider themselves private sector institutions, extension services and early-stage advisory. Most use private funding, and operate accelerators intermediary organizations mainly offer business and incubators. The main target beneficiaries are education for entrepreneurship, collaborative young businesses operating individuals firms, networks, and early-stage infrastructure and advisory, but also cooperatives, business associations, and which they consider their most effective service. Eight financial institutions. Although almost two-thirds intermediary organizations offer technology extension the organizations have sector orientation, the services. The main expected outcome for most rest target specific sectors such manufacturing, intermediary organizations business scale-up. Many agriculture, services, and retail. Some have had also expect build the ecosystem. Five supporting substantial impact (Box 2). organizations expect promote the entry women and youth into entrepreneurship. CEN Box SUCCESS STORIES GUATEMALA Despite the relatively small scale intermediary organizations Guatemala, there are success stories high impact the digital entrepreneurship ecosystem. The organizations’ leaders believe their organizations most effective when delivering technology extension services and early-stage infrastructure and advisory. Progreso part the corporate responsibility strategy the largest cement company Guatemala, implements state-of-the-art entrepreneurship development program that promotes competition, cultivates entrepreneurial culture, and connects start-ups and corporations. Other success cases include Campus Tec, modern technology incubator real estate project, well University Del Valle and Francisco Marroquin, which supports entrepreneurship incorporation and conducts rigorous research and policy advocacy. Bantrab, active player providing solutions MSMEs, investing integrating with acceleration programs and developing targeted solutions for start-ups. Box HONDUR SUCCESS STORIES HONDURAS Honduras, intermediary organizations Honduras Digital Challenge (HDC) implemented the private sector, NGOs, and partnership private sector organizations, public-private partnerships provide variety led Banco Atlantida, that implements enterprise development services, but only comprehensive digital start-up incubation few integrate access finance part their model Honduras. The program supports programs. Eighteen intermediary organizations selected entrepreneurs through 12-week program during which participants acquire provided data their programs and services technical, financial, and leadership skills, learn support the entrepreneurship ecosystem. The main from experienced tutors and mentors, and obtain services offered private organizations and NGOs access digital tools, co-working space, and seed are managerial training, promoting entrepreneurial capital. The program has also strengthened its culture, and network collaboration, including services collaboration with accelerators and investment for market access and trade fairs. These intermediary firms across Latin America order facilitate organizations provide wide variety other services, entrepreneurs’ access capital, help them land new partnerships, and prepare them for the next like building human capital, R&D, and access stages growth. finance minor scale. Over half the intermediary organizations provide technology adoption services, and Since 2017, the program has graduated about seven them support firms through co-working emerging tech companies across the country. spaces and incubation and acceleration programs. This initiative has evolved platform that Much less support firms access finance. Only succeeding connecting the ecosystem, integrating start-up entrepreneurs, and few programs support firms through grants and catalyzing the resources financial institutions, equity finance. Some have had substantial impact academic centers, investors, and donor-funded (Box 3). The Centers for MSME Enterprise Development programs. HDC leaders believe that the interest (CDEs) are part the SENPRENDE network, under institutional venture capital investors will public-private alliances. These centers operate increase the market matures. Meanwhile, the independently, have other funding sources and technical small size the local market limits the potential assistance, and adapt their services the demand and start-ups capture investment. generate volume and attract venture capitalists, start-ups needs local firms the regions where they operate. need create proposals with expanded CDEs implemented about percent the total budget market vision. HDC and its partners also advocate resources intermediary organizations 2019. for improving the business climate. HDC leaders believe that the ecosystem requires—in addition incubation programs—policies that provide tax incentives for incubation and acceleration programs for innovative start-ups and the digital transformation MSMEs. OVAT CEN ADOPTION TECHNOLOGY OVAT CEN 5.1 DEMAND FOR TECHNOLOGY The digital ecosystem more important than ever. such social media, messaging apps, and cash Firms need digitalize their operations and sales transactions. Firms that already use digital payments adapt the post-COVID situation. necessary see them much less risky than cash-based digitalize sales, marketing, and production processes transactions, but there are high commissions for transform the supply chain order competitive. trans-border transactions, and there remains need dispel concerns about fraud digital payments with Small firms Central America are just beginning firms that still transact cash. However, the COVID-19 adopt technology, although there has been crisis has forced buyers the region online, and some progress recently due COVID-19. Most firms have followed. Two-thirds micro and small Central American firms are still using manual methods firms report increases online sales during COVID-19 and basic digital tools manage their operations, (Figure 17). The growth online orders has created sales, marketing, and decision-making processes new challenges for Central American firms. Fifty-three (Figure 16). Production and back-office operations percent microenterprises report increased delivery such procurement and supply chain management times. Over quarter firms all size categories are even less digitized—Central American firms have report order volumes that have exceeded capacity and focused more digitizing their sales interfaces and challenges with identifying reliable suppliers. There channels than their back offices and supply chains. are practically differences between comparable Firms’ use online stores and marketplaces still women- and men-led firms the adoption limited the region, and most firms use methods technologies. Figure 16. ADOPTION TECHNOLOGIES CONNECT ONLINE, MAKE DECISIONS, MANAGE SALES AND MARKETING, AND ANALYZE CUSTOMERS, FIRM SIZE 68% Social media networks 65% 54% Cell phone 55% 49% Messaging video call apps 53% Television 26% 36% Meetings with other business people 25% 46% Ads (Google ads, Facebook ads, Youtube ads) 25% 38% Radio 20% 25% 19% Content apps (YouTube, TikTok) 24% Technical demonstrations public private agents 15% 24% 13% Precision tools (sensors, cameras, satellite images) 29% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% Micro and small (1-19 employees) Medium and large (20 and more employees) Source: Digital Technology Support Survey IFC 2021. OVAT CEN Figure 17. PERCENT FIRMS THAT HAVE INCREASED ONLINE SALES DUE COVID, FIRM SIZE Micr0 (1-4 employees) 65% Small (5-19 employees) 66% Medium (20-99 employees) 68% Large (+100 employees) 78% 55% 60% 65% 70% 75% 80% Source: Digital Technology Support Survey IFC 2021. However, midsize and larger firms are quite real-time market information tools, cybersecurity well their way using more sophisticated technologies, and e-commerce platforms. Firms technologies. Forty-two percent use broadband, and services sectors also tend perceive themselves percent use fifth-generation wireless technology using technologies more intensively. For example, (5G) connect online, while percent use customer midsize and large BPO and financial services firms rate relationship management tools for marketing and the intensity their technology use above points sales, and percent use artificial intelligence (AI) point scale such areas human resources, analyze customers. Larger firms have also started quality control, and sales and marketing, while midsize adopt virtual reality and blockchain streamline and large agricultural firms rate their technology use and scale their customer interactions and business 7.5 points out 10. operations. Midsize and large firms have also sought Firms that use technologies intensively grow hire technical talent able leverage these faster and are more productive. This partly technologies: percent large firms have hired because more productive firms have more resources programmers, and percent have hired in-house adopt technologies and talent, but also engineers leverage technologies. Like small firms, because technologies have made their adopters more large firms report increased impetus digitize productive. Over percent small and medium due COVID-19. Seventy-eight percent large firms firms and over percent large firms that have report increases online sales during COVID-19, and adopted technologies intensively also report having percent large firms report increased delivery times. gained new customers and increased their productivity Across firm size categories, faster-growing, due new technologies (Figure 18). Meanwhile, only export-driven firms, especially financial third firms that use technologies less intensively, and BPO services, are especially likely use “incipient digitizers,” report such gains. The majority sophisticated technologies. Across sectors, firms firms all sizes have yet use more sophisticated financial and BPO services stand out first adopters technologies such AI, virtual reality, blockchain, technologies, likely partly because their customers even e-commerce. This suggests that there are tend particularly digitized. About three-quarters Central America great opportunities for efficiency firms these sectors have used cloud computing gains through the adoption technology. for least one year, and over percent have adopted ECH Figure 18. GAINS FROM THE ADOPTION TECHNOLOGIES, FIRM SIZE AND DIGITAL INTENSITY−MATURE DIGITIZERS (TOP-50 PERCENTILE INTENSITY USING TECHNOLOGIES) Micro (1-4 employees) Growth sales 31% 34% 26% New markets 35% 28% 24% New costumers 39% 32% 21% Improved human capital 35% 35% 17% Reduction costs 28% 33% 26% Increase productivity 35% 29% 22% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Small (1-19 employees) Growth sales 35% 46% 15% New markets 31% 38% 26% New costumers 44% 39% 15% Improved human capital 36% 41% 18% Reduction costs 26% 36% 32% Increase productivity 43% 40% 13% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Medium (20-99 employees) Growth sales 43% 42% 11% New markets 33% 42% 19% New costumers 47% 35% 14% Improved human capital 36% 42% 16% Reduction costs 27% 32% 33% Increase productivity 44% 39% 13% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Large (+100 employees) Growth sales 47% 36% 13% New markets 45% 31% 19% New costumers 51% 33% 12% Improved human capital 46% 37% 15% Reduction costs 38% 35% 23% Increase productivity 55% 34% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% great deal Quite lot Somewhat Not all Source: Digital Technology Support Survey IFC 2021. OVAT CEN Firms the region see e-commerce, fintech, and robotics especially transformative their sectors over the next decade. Over percent firms see e-commerce the most transformative technology their sector, over quarter firms financial services see fintech the most important technology, and some percent manufacturing firms see automation and most transformative technologies the coming decade (Figure 19). Figure 19. NUMBER FIRMS SEEING TECHNOLOGY MOST IMPACTFUL TECHNOLOGY THEIR SECTOR THE NEXT DECADE, SECTOR Business process outsourcing (BPO) Financial services 184 104 High-tech manufacturing 169 Light manufacturing Processed food 172 Livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry) Agriculture (except livestock) 106 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% E-commerce Financial technologies Automation Robotics Machine learning Artificial intelligence Blockchain Internet Things Cloud edge computing Cybersecurity Source: Digital Technology Support Survey IFC 2021. 5.2 CHALLENGES FIRMS FACE ADOPTING TECHNOLOGIES Firms perceive challenges adopting technologies. The challenges include lack awareness about what technologies exist, uncertainties about the return investment technologies, and lack access finance and talent acquire and use technologies. Twenty-six percent microenterprises and percent small firms report challenges with the cost acquiring technologies, and percent microenterprises and percent small firms feel they lack adequate information available technologies. Some percent midsize firms and percent large firms cite workforce skills gaps such lack highly trained professionals their countries challenges the use technology (Figure 20). ECH Figure 20. PERCENTAGE FIRMS MENTIONING OBSTACLE ADOPTING NEW EQUIPMENT, MACHINERY, SOFTWARE, DIGITIZING PROCESSES, FIRM SIZE 26% 23% Acquisition cost 22% 18% 19% Lack information available 17% equipment and technology 16% 16% 12% Difficulty obtaining financing 10% 10% Uncertainty demand Lack conviction about the cost/benefit 10% 11% Lack technical skills required operate the equipment 10% Consumer preferences not value product quality Lack knowledge Lack access providers accompany the process Access maintenance and after-sales service Lack availability technologies Regulations Limited services such electricity, internet connection water 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Source: Digital Technology Support Survey IFC 2021. OVAT CEN Payments are another opportunity and challenge for the regional firms gain new efficiencies and interact with customers. Especially online seller-exporters are embracing digital payments such cards and e-wallets (Figure 21) and have extent overcome their less digitized peers’ concerns about payment fraud. Less digitized sellers that not yet have online stores presence marketplaces worry about the security e-wallets and mobile payments, suggesting need for greater awareness building for firms about digital transactions. Also, high commissions are obstacle for e-payments. Figure 21. PAYMENTS ACCEPTANCE METHODS, USE ONLINE CHANNELS 82% 73% 73% 69% 63% 61% 60% 60% 58% 55% 53% 51% 50% 48% 45% 43% 36% 34% 30% 26% 18% 16% 15% 10% lle lle lin offl line ine lle offl cia lle Cash Cheque Bank wire Debit and credit cards E-wallet and mobile payments Other payments such codes Bitcoins and virtual currencies Source: Digital Technology Support Survey IFC 2021. Another challenge that firms perceive need for support. Over three-quarters firms across size categories learn about technologies from national and international technology suppliers. Although technology providers are supplying technical assistance adopt their technologies, companies all countries need further support. far, over percent micro and small firms across all countries Central America have gained technical assistance adopt technologies from technology providers. However, fifth fewer have secured further technical assistance from their governments. Over percent micro and small firms Costa Rica, Salvador, Honduras, and Panama, and over percent micro and small firms Guatemala and Nicaragua call for training and education better placed adopt new technologies, and over third call for support identifying new technologies. Large firms across all six countries have these same needs for additional support. ECH 5.3. USE TECHNOLOGY TECH COMPANIES Most digital technology providers all size Connectivity still problem the region. categories are using broadband and fourth One-half large firms not report any interruptions generation (4G) mobile connections. Fifty-four Internet connectivity, but percent midsize firms percent micro and small and percent midsize and percent large firms experience three more and large firms are using broadband. Thirty-seven interruptions per month (Figure 22). Microenterprises percent micro and small and percent midsize have even more challenges with quality connections, and large firms are using mobile connections. and percent still have interruptions internet Fifty-six percent larger firms also connect online connections three more times per month. greater using fiberoptics and percent use other wired and lesser degrees, countries the region are also broadband subscriptions (including DSL and cable subject power outages—such the September 16, modem) and satellite connections. 2019 blackout affecting millions people across four countries—that interrupt business continuity. Figure 22. PERCENTAGE FIRMS EXPERIENCING SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS 2019 100% 90% 13% 14% 17% 80% 70% 39% 54% 54% 60% 38% 50% 40% 30% 50% 20% 39% 28% 26% 10% Micro Small Medium Large (1-4 employees) (5-19 employees) (20-99 employees) (+100 employees) Never Once month 1-2 times per month 3-5 times per month 5-10 times per month Source: Digital Technology Support Survey IFC 2021. Firms are adopting open source technologies. About penetrate international markets, midsize quarter regional digital service providers leverage and large companies seek advice from business open source technologies. Twenty-three percent associations and export promotion agencies. microenterprises and percent small firms use Thirty-six percent small and percent midsize their own developments, and another percent and and large exporters have sought advice from business percent, respectively, use combinations their own associations, and quarter have sought assistance from developments and open source technologies. export promotion agencies. Over percent micro and small non-exporters have not received (or sought) assistance from export promotion agencies. OVAT CEN 5.4. CHALLENGES FACED DIGITAL PROVIDERS AND OTHER ENTREPRENEURS Central American digital service providers registering patent very long and costly and does face significant challenges with respect the not adapt technological change. Various countries business environment and regulatory framework, Central America have promoted anti-red tape laws, but e-government services, access finance, access they need reinforce implementation. markets, human capital, and support from public policies. Business registration, taxes, access finance, Entrepreneurs also point outdated regulatory intellectual property protection, cybersecurity, and frameworks. Regulations have not adapted regulations that have not adapted the needs the technological innovation. Several legal provisions were countries are the main challenges for the use digital created some time ago without taking into account services Central America. international markets, new technologies and the need for e-commerce. digital service providers feel hampered limited access Existing regulations may also prevent the formation customers and information. Providers across size highly innovative start-ups due entry barriers, categories also face challenges recruiting talent due for instance, fintech. Issues tax regimes and lack perceived workforce skills gaps and lack good incentives are also complicated because there are local training programs. Public policy does not favor the many taxes that affect entrepreneurs and companies. technology industry. Digital entrepreneurs also face issues with personal data protection and minimum wage laws. There also BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT AND are barriers terms legislation, tools, and functioning banking and finance. addition, the legal and REGULATORY FRAMEWORK administrative frameworks for bankruptcy Central Digital service providers see the business America plunge entrepreneurs into long and costly processes. environment the main challenge for the use digital services their countries. Central America E-GOVERNMENT SERVICES faces lot bureaucracy. Fifty-two percent firms Entrepreneurs also mention insufficient Costa Rica cite challenges with fiscal regulations e-government and customer services (Figure 23). Fifty-two percent firms Nicaragua challenges. Government services are complicated and cite business registration, and well over third firms time-consuming. Many government agencies improved all countries cite cybersecurity risks barriers their online services during the pandemic, but there are digital services provision their countries. Guatemalan still many services that need digitalization for companies companies also mention the issue formalization successful. There little interconnection entrepreneurs and limitations e-commerce and interoperability, locally regionally. Limited their main challenges. Although there has been interconnection constrains the adoption new digital some progress terms regulations facilitate technologies. There generally accepted local formalization, barriers the closure companies electronic payment method for government services. due rigid bureaucracies are strong disincentives Most countries Central America already have for opening and formalizing them, slowing down approved electronic signature laws. However, most entrepreneurs and investors. Furthermore, companies cases, they are not fully implemented. Companies have highlight that there are many customs and logistical also highlighted the lack customer service during the hurdles importing exporting products online. pandemic. When government agencies went digital, They also face problems with obtaining other permits, there was one answer the phone attend such phyto-sanitary, environmental, and health issues due capacity constraints, office closures, and permits. addition, there scattered information, working from home. Information longer provided, separate and distinct offices that must visited, and and entrepreneurs not have point contact, the payment numerous fees. There are also problems thus losing access knowledge about procedures with intellectual property protection. Costa Rican and requirements. This means that entrepreneurs companies, for instance, point out that the process need lawyers and experts explain processes and ECH procedures them, creating additional cost that digital authentication layers top their systems, could saved the government had web page allowing individuals verify attributes and authenticate containing all the information interest. identities access services remotely. Other countries, such Honduras and Salvador, are implementing Digital systems Central America generally have structural reforms revamp and modernize their room improve. All Central American countries have systems, conceiving them cornerstone national implemented foundational digital systems with high digital transformation. Exchanging information between levels coverage accelerate inclusive development the public and private sectors critical implement and access the formal economy. However, only effective digital strategy and improve the quality and Panama and Costa Rica have also implemented robust delivery public services. Figure 23. PERCENTAGE MICRO AND SMALL FIRMS CITING BARRIERS DIGITAL SERVICES THEIR COUNTRY 52% 30% 31% Fiscal regulations 33% 34% 22% 46% 46% 36% Cybersecurity risks 39% 41% 40% 46% 45% Business registration requirements 47% 44% 52% 34% 29% 23% Rules internet providers 24% 25% (e.g. licensing requirements) 25% 28% 27% 36% 34% Intellectual property protection 36% 28% 32% 25% 27% 24% Data privacy rules 25% 14% 28% 23% 23% 25% Copyright issues 19% 28% 35% 20% 16% Data hosting rules 14% 14% 17% 25% 20% 23% Consumer protection legislation 24% 22% 14% 32% 20% 39% Lack limitation legal liabilities 32% Costa Rica 25% digital suppliers (“safe harbor”) 21% Salvador 37% 18% Guatemala 13% Censorship rules 19% Honduras 17% 24% Nicaragua 11% 16% Panama Business shutdown, bankrupcy and 10% insolvency requirements 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% Source: Digital Technology Support Survey IFC 2021. OVAT CEN ACCESS FINANCE 2021). Guatemala ecosystem valued USD 200 million (USD million raised), Costa Rica USD Access finance one the main issues million (USD million raised), Salvador USD mentioned both SMEs and tech start-ups. million (USD million raised), Honduras USD SMEs listed acquisition cost, lack information million (USD million raised), and Panama USD available equipment, and access finance the top million (USD million raised) (Peña 2021). However, only barriers digitalizing their processes (Box 4). Many percent innovators seeking equity find investors the requirements for access finance necessitate the first months (GALI 2021). fragmented Central that companies have been operating for long time American market with very few active players also leads and have assets back their loans. Another major smaller projects. Fundraising ventures represent limiting factor the informality the economy— third the average project size Latin America, small entrepreneurs are not able formalize quickly shown recent survey accelerator programs and meet all the requirements for loan. Also, interest (GALI 2021). Additionally, Costa Rican companies rates are usually high for entrepreneurs. Having complained that there are still clear regulations access more resources gives greater access new for structuring venture capital. Honduran companies technologies, addition allowing their rapid and highlighted significant risks associated with the legal early adoption increase productivity. During the framework. For instance, the Commercial Code does pandemic, there was opportunity reestablish not include some critical commercial instruments (such credit lowering interest rates with banks through convertible notes, warrants, stock options, and relief programs, but access was complicated. restricted stock). Guatemala has very solid banking system, but regulations prevent accepting the high Most digital start-ups need capital rather than levels risk commonly found with highly innovative debt grow, but the market for seed, venture, firms. Salvador needs improve its commercial code and private equity funds Central America include more protection for minority investors. underdeveloped. The ecosystem value technology-based start-ups Central America The region beginning showcase success stories estimated USD 319 million (USD million raised), digital entrepreneurs that accessed private about 0.14 percent the value the Latin American equity support growth, but most incubation and and Caribbean total ecosystem USD 221 billion (Peña acceleration programs lack the capacity guide Box THE CASE THINK DIGITAL ACADEMY young Honduran couple founded Think Digital Academy 2012 provide digital education for small and medium companies. Initially, the company operated franchise the Digital Marketing Institute, but they now create their own content adapted the needs and growing demand the Central American market. Think Digital has taught more than 250 courses digital commerce topics including digital strategy, social media communication, political marketing, and digital transformation mindset. The demand for international expertise has led the company pursue partnerships with organizations such HubSpot, Google, and other global providers digital education. Their primary clients are commercial banks, the Honduran Tourism Institute, and enterprise development programs. Serving clients with regional presence has allowed Think Digital grow its markets regionally delivering content through digital platform. The main obstacle faced Think Digital Academy has been the lack trust digital service providers Honduras. Another obstacle faced Think Digital Academy has been the lack capital continue expanding its services. wasn’t until 2019 that Think Digital obtained seed capital from private investor who believed their business model. This capital allowed the company standardize its operation, improve the content its courses, expand marketing, and upgrade classroom infrastructure (physical and digital). COVID-19 increased demand for digital skills and digital marketing services, and Think Digital adapted its systems deliver online courses and expanded its outreach beyond Tegucigalpa, the capital city. The challenge during this period was maintain working capital due the difficulties that MSME clients had with paying during the pandemic. ECH start-ups the process linking and selling their report the use advanced technologies such ideas capture private equity. One good example artificial intelligence, but SMEs report that they are success story that has expanded different countries primarily using technology for digital marketing and Central America Hugo App (Box 5). Many programs communications. Connectivity, education, lack trust, provide services that support businesses through early and other socioeconomic factors limit consumers’ and stages, but mainly terms management training. businesses’ demand for digital services. Although mobile Only few programs support start-ups through penetration high (above 100 percent penetration) early-stage financing. Incubators and accelerators most countries, mobile broadband subscriptions the region need strengthen their roles supporting and fixed broadband penetration are below regional start-ups through the “de-risking” phase and prepare benchmarks Guatemala and Honduras (ITU 2020). them attract and receive equity from venture capital Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras are among and angel investors. addition funding, these the Latin American and Caribbean countries with the investors can also bring technology transfer, access lowest quality connectivity rural areas. Between markets, and industry experience. percent and percent rural populations lack access high-speed connectivity (Ziegler al. 2020). LOCAL DEMAND AND ACCESS There are substantial opportunities for MARKETS international market expansion digital services Demand for digital services increasing within Central America and internationally, yet Central America, but lack innovation key there limited link between the supply and industry sectors and poor connectivity rural demand for digital products and services. Over areas constrain local demand from consumers percent firms Costa Rica, Salvador, and and businesses. COVID-19 triggered increased Guatemala and over percent firms Honduras, use digital services, mainly for e-commerce, digital Nicaragua, and Panama identify lack information communications, and electronic payments. However, about potential customers the main barrier the digital transformation MSMEs limited. expanding new markets. This lack data points Digital services can help boost the productivity need for better information sharing and matchmaking the traditional agribusiness and light manufacturing between these suppliers digital services and sectors, which have lower productivity. Larger firms technologies and their potential customers who report Box THE CASE HUGO TECHNOLOGIES–REGIONAL EXPANSION THROUGH GLOBAL VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTORS Founded 2017 three Salvadoran technology entrepreneurs, Hugo App developed mobile application for food delivery that has reached over one million downloads Salvador and expanding other countries the region. 2020, Hugo had become the first Central American “unicorn,” reaching over USD million sales and valued over USD one billion. Hugo connects food services and consumers through its mobile application, allowing for digital payments, efficient logistics, and tracking for home and office deliveries. Its founders had technology and financial backgrounds and business networks that allowed them raise capital from international technology investors fund regional expansion. Private investors have provided not only funds but also their expertise and strategic vision adapt the business model Central American markets. Despite its remarkable growth, which accelerated during COVID-19, Hugo App still encounters barriers expanding its markets and operations. One the biggest hurdles the lack streamlined payment processing platforms that integrate all services the region. The processes are still cumbersome. The lack digital economy regulations does not provide sufficient certainty and transparency. keeps large global technology and financial innovation providers from entering the region, which could enable smoother transition the digitalization payments. Finding the right talent—with technology skills and entrepreneurial mindset—has also been challenge. Yet, the rapid growth digital delivery platforms the region has become increasingly important source employment for young software developers and digital markets, well for less-skilled workers such motorcycle drivers. OVAT CEN challenges learning about and identifying technologies digital skills among youth and children. Salvador, and solutions suitable for their needs. Digital freelancers Kodigo private NGO program) and Youth the Salvador, for example, with the right skills Cloud (supported Amazon Web Services) deliver (programming and English) are increasingly providing short-term certificates train youth specific ICT services through global platforms such Upwork skills that are high demand the global market. and Freelancer.com. more dynamic ecosystem will Costa Rica, the Ministry Public Education absorb local talent boost the digital transformation implements Techno@prender introduce digital skills regional industry clusters, promote investment, and the general education system. generate jobs. LACK PUBLIC POLICY HUMAN CAPITAL SUPPORTING THE Central American digital service providers face TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY challenges recruiting talent due perceived Public policy does not favor the Central American workforce skills gaps and lack good local technology industry. many Central American training programs and educational systems. countries, innovation punished. There are Salvadorean companies perceive that there are dynamic models that allow innovation and provide very talented people the country, but there are accompaniment, financial support, and technology limitations terms their cultural background transfer that companies can reach point where with respect entrepreneurship and innovation. they can access credit and support move forward Guatemalan companies express that they not have with autonomy. Honduras, for example, technology access more professional human capital because not considered industry, despite the fact that they cannot compete with larger companies there technology industry association with more terms pay scales. Another challenge the quality than 200 members. There measurement the training. important have standards and national accounts the Central Bank what the generic curriculum, well certified consultants technology industry contributes the economy, standardize training methodologies for entrepreneurs. which hinders several public policy issues that are Costa Rican companies express that entrepreneurs oriented toward digital entrepreneurship. Also, even have little knowledge training management, though digitalization priority due COVID-19, finance, investors, etc. Therefore, they not know there public policy guide the need for what stage their venture should attractive digitalization. Costa Rican companies mention that investment fund. One the biggest barriers difficult for start-ups access public contracts. for the academic sector the approval time required Without having three years positive sales records, update the curriculum for particular degree, many cannot access public sector contracts. This which makes hard adapt global standards. causes innovations discarded. Approval new programs and careers can take years. Honduran companies express that their main challenge for local firms have access professionals with technological skills the system primary, secondary, and higher education. This study identified programs that stand out developing ECH OVAT CEN POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS IGOI ECH FEP ENN GIY OVAT CEN Approve and adopt regional digital business incubation and acceleration programs see whether transformation strategy for MSMEs that includes there substantial unserved demand, reorienting e-commerce and other ICTs boost productivity, such programs the needs the local ecosystems. innovation, and access markets. The strategy For example, important restructure programs should contain least: (a) promotion digital support early-stage businesses and create more technologies that can boost high potential ecosystems’ linkages between the supply and demand for productivity, including regional electronic commerce technology. CENPROMYPE can promote regional platforms and marketplaces that integrate regional platform for digital start-up programs and digital offers products and services and that can transformation programs for MSMEs. This tool can specialized market segments; (b) promotion promote innovation the design, implementation, regional access finance for digital transformation and evaluation enterprise development programs and innovation MSMEs; (c) provision software sharing impact evaluations, georeferencing MSME regional organizations micro and small companies support programs, mapping areas support, and help them have more competent back and front showcasing best practices, effective methodologies, office able grow; (d) improvement procedures and success stories. Suggested responsible agencies and regulations for air cargo-expedited shipments; (e) and time frame: CENPROMYPE, ministries economy/ promotion low-cost electronic payment mechanisms MIPYME agencies, ministries science and technology, including enabling environment; (f) revision innovation agencies. Medium term. specific regulations for the digital sector and promotion regional integration harmonization, including Provide technical assistance SMEs e-commerce, banking laws, cyber security, data technologies available through innovation research protection, competition policies, consumer protection, centers and technology laboratories, business and intellectual property laws; (g) promoting linkages associations, alliances with global technology between supply and demand for technology; and (h) providers, and the regional SBDC network, allowing increasing MSMEs’ digital transformation skills, including companies test services and technologies little marketing and sales regional markets, business- cost, and promote linkages between developers to-business (B2B), and business-to-government and firms that demand technology. Firms tend (B2G). MSMEs need more capacity implement learn about new technologies from their peers and online channel management platforms, sell foreign business associations, which suggests that business markets, and use digital tools. Regional integration associations and SBDCs could have more permanent should particularly focus facilitating e-commerce “digital transformation hubs” where firms can learn exchanges and digital payments create economies about technologies and digital transformation processes scale Central America. Suggested responsible and their peers’ experiences with technology adoption. agencies: CENPROMYPE and COMIECO. Time frame: Such digital transformation hubs would enable new Approval-Short term; Adoption-Medium term. connections between firms that seek identify digital technology solutions and providers that seek Promote coordination among government, identify new clients. Such “tech match” could also organizations, and donors follow clear regionalized enable Central American digital service priorities based specific local ecosystems providers display their services and technologies support start-ups, especially digital start-ups. potential B2B customers across the region. Another Because there are several institutions and public solution could virtual tech fairs and demo sessions programs providing business development services with local and international solutions providers. with different methodologies and approaches Regionalizing this activity could make attractive for support entrepreneurship, important promote international providers reach firms scale. Suggested coordination among government, organizations, and responsible agencies and time frame: CENPROMYPE, donors follow clear priorities based specific local ministries economy/MIPYME agencies, ministries ecosystems. Governments could create technology science and technology, innovation agencies through centers coordination with incubators/accelerators business associations, and SBDCs. Short term. offer extension services, laboratories for testing and prototyping geographic areas where there are Provide technical assistance programs local high potential entrepreneurship ecosystems. For help SMEs digitalize their operations further. tech start-ups, also important review existing Buyers’ demand for more effective service delivery prompted COVID-19 could motivate firms adopt OVAT CEN new technologies across their sales cycles, from governments want support these ventures through procurement financing and payments, and also tax incentives, might important ensure that the prompt traditional providers like delivery services and laws for business conception allow for less formality and financial services digitalize their operations further. that the state can have some control many businesses necessary not only develop technological products that are now informal and not declare their sales. and services but also develop digital competencies for industries, such manufacturing, agribusiness IV. Payments digitization essential for Central (agtech), and finance (fintech), that will help them America digital sector. Central American MSMEs need their work the digital era. various service providers low-cost electronic payment platforms that allow for digitalize, the public sector can encourage solutions business-to-consumer (B2C) and B2B transactions. such open applications programming interfaces, Regional B2B payment platforms with low transaction open banking, digital identities, and blockchain costs should promoted. The region can also draw support interoperability the various public and many useful international models streamline and private service providers. Firm-specific approaches such lower the costs digital payments. One such example training and financing need complemented xoom.com PayPal service), instant, low-cost, and couched scalable ecosystem approaches that cardless payment solution that works well with major enable firms access digital services easily and that banks and credit cards internationally. avoid setting where various services become “digital Continue modernizing the regulatory framework islands.” Suggested responsible agencies and time for financial inclusion and innovation. This required frame: CENPROMYPE, ministries economy/MIPYME allow for financial innovation start-ups launch agencies, ministries science and technology, and solutions promote e-payments and access innovation agencies through business associations, finance for individuals and businesses under regulatory SBDCs, universities, and business schools. Medium term. supervision and maintaining the stability the financial Create strong regional and national programs system. Norms need also allow for improved risk improve the business environment and regulatory management and faster approval systems loans framework using e-government services and financial institutions. Countries also need observatory good practices. This would have update their banking laws and commercial regulatory number aspects: frameworks include modern forms debt, equity, and hybrid financing instruments, including protection Various countries Central America have promoted for minority investors. Central American countries anti-red tape laws (leyes anti trámites), but they need can also adopt fintech laws formalize and promote rigorously implemented. also important alternative finance providers support digitalizing review and amend the laws and regulations that are firms with short- and longer-term loans and equity affecting the business environment. financing. essential create the regulatory conditions for early-stage financing develop through II. Especially taking into account the lessons that COVID-19 venture capital and crowdfunding. teaching all countries, governments need update many outdated laws that are obstacles e-commerce VI. data and electronic transactions are becoming and e-government. also important review tax more valuable business processes, governments regulations and update them adapt the nature need stay vigilant and provide certainty investors digital transactions and the dynamism technology. and firms the rules for the collection, storage, and use data. Countries need regulate aspects such III. terms facilitating formalization and closure, the data protection, cybersecurity, and ride-sharing. important thing not for the state offer incentives discussions continue the multilateral economic but for make easier for companies operate. system (OECD and WTO), and while bilateral trade Such facilitation includes not imposing obstacles, agreements are revised, Central America would well that opening and closing companies easy, reducing advised observe how current regulations and trade experimentation costs. Uruguay has type company agreements impact digital businesses and promote made for entrepreneurs, mix between corporation new regulations promote investment, technology and limited liability company, which does not ask adoption, and access foreign markets, regionally for many requirements, involves more people, and and globally. Finding balance between regulating facilitates digital entrepreneurs and venture capital. for trust and avoiding creating too much regulatory ECO DAT uncertainty will important and challenging task e-government agencies and all government institutions. for governments, policy makers, and regulators. Medium term. VII. markets digitalize, competition regulators need Establish regional facility for digital adapt competition policies digital consumer transformation and create differentiated credit protection. Competition regulators and consumer policy for SMEs. Central American firms require more protection agencies both need strengthen and financing adopt new technologies. The availability update their capacities respond emerging threats. such financing could also motivate more firms consider technologies. Central American countries VIII. Countries could also seek create regional could create digital transformation funds that leverage regulations improve the business environment using existing government SME and technology funds and the SICA framework. co-finance viable digital transformation projects with IX. would help create regional observatory the target firms and private lenders and investors. The good practices analyze, for each the different digital business transformation strategy should include options, what decisions and actions have been taken the promotion regional access finance for digital order move forward. should taken into account transformation and innovation MSMEs. Considering that each country has different legal framework, but the significant growth and productivity gains that they have problem common: the need advance regional firms are gaining from technology adoption, technological adoption and generate job opportunities. this funding vehicle could well generate important return lenders and investors and, over time, become Suggested responsible agencies and time frame: sustainable private sector-led vehicle. addition, COMIECO, ministries economy, financial system governments should create differentiated credit policy regulators. Medium term. for micro and small companies because they cannot comply with the requirements that banks demand. Promote e-government services, reducing Central American countries can also adopt fintech laws unnecessary formalities and involving formalize and promote alternative finance providers entrepreneurs developing digital solutions for that can support digitalizing firms with short- and central government and municipal procedures. longer-term loans and equity financing. This facility better allow for e-government progress, could complemented with technology adoption important reduce unnecessary formalities and innovation grant programs help firms digitalize and documents not digitalize what does not transform operations meet post-COVID demands, add any value the process the government among other needs. New grant and voucher programs controls. Another important aspect e-government could developed. For instance, governments could implement electronic signature laws. also provide small grants for digitalization, e-commerce important that governments create e-payment adoption, transformation any their operational gateways for their services. Also, governments need processes. Grant programs could combined with work the interoperability their services business advisory services maximize impact. within the country and with other Central American Suggested responsible agencies and time frame: Central countries. Central American countries could create American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) with mutual recognition IDs facilitate opening bank support from IFC. Short term. accounts and businesses and promote data transfer facilitate migration while personal data protected. The region can also catalyze early-stage financial All improvements government services must support, venture capital, and debt instruments accompanied educating entrepreneurs about online fit the needs digital entrepreneurs. The objective modalities. These improvements can attained foster the entrepreneurship ecosystem creating linking government institutions’ digital improvement financial tools fund the early stage–from idea needs with technology laboratories, accelerators, creation fundable business. The facility could include and freelance experts develop solutions for first-loss-guarantee mechanism reduce the risk government services through digital technologies. debtors (financial institutions) and equity investors. Connectivity, digital identifications, data management would thereby also reduce the costs and requirements and use, blockchain, and other technologies can for entrepreneurs, such sales and financial adapted resolve problems public administration. performance, time business, and tangible assets. Suggested responsible agencies and time frame: Innovative financial instruments can also include hybrid OVAT CEN debt/equity participating bonds, profit-participating and accelerators and support strengthening and linking loans, crowdfunding, and asset-based finance like private and NGO programs other key ecosystem purchase order finance and factoring. Transformational actors. Medium term. entrepreneurs could also benefit from mezzanine financing instruments, falling along the spectrum holistic approach supporting entrepreneurship between pure equity and pure debt. This facility can needed, which links funding pipeline explore new fund structures, moving from closed-ended development. Fostering the supply side the business funds more flexible time horizons, lower management angel venture capital ecosystem not enough fees, higher carried interest, and broader exit options. guarantee access external sources finance that Ultimately, should target funds and their instruments can support experimentation and innovation. The start-ups’ needs, aiming fill financing gaps and investment readiness quality the pipeline also avoid crowding out private investments. should crucial. Investment readiness programs are important consider the optimal structure legal and economic provide individualized training, mentoring, coaching, and incentives and guarantee that access capital based other services overcome these constraints. Improving business potential and performance (Tradros and the effectiveness these programs means working Horton 2018, 37). Suggested responsible agencies and closely with investors understand their requirements time frame: CABEI, with support from IFC, commercial and tailoring them accordingly (Tradros and Horton 2018, banks, financial institutions, and technology firms, can 38). Suggested responsible agencies and time frame: act catalyst boost access finance for digital Private incubators and accelerators. Medium term. entrepreneurs. Medium term. Governments, accelerators, universities, and Strengthen the quality incubators and business associations should promote linkages accelerators, promoting start-up–focused, between digital service providers and national, strategic, and financially robust programs. regional, and international industries. Ecosystem support programs should strive have important create extend incentives strengthen active private sector participation the core collaboration and linkages between demand for and their offerings (Tradros and Horton 2018, 38) and supply technology. digital business transformation center their actions what start-ups need their strategy and marketplace platform could established particular contexts. Promote robust strategic and match industry needs and digital technology financial approaches among world-class incubators providers. This would accelerate the process and acceleration programs while reinforcing broad developing, adapting, transferring, and scaling programs upgrade MSMEs’ digital and business technologies. The linkages could support digitization skills. Public and private initiatives can agree develop initiatives geared toward strategic repositioning investment standards that focus the financial high-employment sectors (e.g., maquila apparel returns and maximize the economic and social sustainable fashion, capacity building for social media impact enterprise development efforts. Supporting marketing and e-commerce for retail). could deliver facilities for incubators/accelerators can develop local business solutions that help transform SMEs, diversifying entrepreneurs. One good example IFC Startup their products, accessing local, regional, and international Catalyst, which facility through which invest markets, avoiding physical contact, and addressing portfolio incubators, accelerators, seed funds, and entrepreneurship challenges other sectors. Suggested similar vehicles and structures (collectively referred responsible agencies and time frame: CENPROMYPE, seed-stage funding mechanisms—“SSFMs”) through ministries economy/MIPYME agencies, ministries equity and quasi-equity instruments. These SSFMs, science and technology, innovation agencies through turn, support entrepreneurs and their early-stage business associations and small business development companies across IFC target markets. Suggested services (SBDCs). Medium term. responsible agencies and time frame: From regional Export promotion agencies the region and perspective, CENPROMYPE can promote best practices embassies abroad can play useful further role and links world-class incubation and acceleration promoting digital service providers world markets models, well regional database certified and with large buyers. Such Latin American countries digital entrepreneurship mentors. National MSME and Colombia, Chile, and Costa Rica have successfully science and innovation agencies can promote standards attracted foreign business customers procure digitally and quality certifications for technology incubators deliverable services across sectors, including gaming, ECO DAT animation, customer service, and BPO. Costa Rica has coaching can promote women empowerment and been extraordinarily successful global standards leadership. Programs such IFC We-Fi the Middle East increasing its digitally deliverable services exports and North Africa, United Nations E-Women, UNCTAD She the past few years, part thanks local companies Trades E-commerce Programs, and TFO Canada provide finding new customers and part attracting large best-practice interventions that aim boost female tech companies such Amazon and Microsoft locate digital entrepreneurship. Suggested responsible agencies operations Costa Rica. These players are now also and time frame: Ministries education together with helping groom local technology talent and creating innovation agencies, ministries economy, women's useful knowledge spillovers the economy, including development agencies, universities, and business schools. for small digital services firms. Other Central American Medium term. countries could borrow from this playbook, for example, leading trade missions major service industry fairs, Central America should consider formulating public bringing procurement leads global companies the policy support innovation the technology region meet with local suppliers, and improving the industry. First, technology development should investment climate for digital services. Accelerators considered industry the national accounts allow could play important role this. There are many measurements and policy-oriented actions. Second, hubs and entities various countries, but coordination important promote coordination among the interior the country should expanded. government, supporting organizations, and donors Accelerators could promote platforms mechanisms define priorities across local ecosystems and identify link innovators with the needs the industry, where critical gaps. From this analysis, would essential industries demand, and entrepreneurs can offer. integrate municipalities and local organizations addition, chambers commerce could also play planning and delivering technical assistance local crucial role linking service providers with industries. firms and identifying potential areas harmonize Suggested responsible agencies and time frame: export policies and regulations facilitate the growth promotion agencies. Medium term. innovative sectors, such fintech application platforms. Third, innovation should rewarded, for Update the education and vocational curricula instance, allowing entrepreneurs make mistakes the needs the digital industry, promote through providing for businesses have flexible legal academy-industry partnerships, and increase the constitutions that entrepreneurs can formalize and participation women training programs. even close business quickly without excessively important facilitate code development, managerial and burdensome requirements. Entrepreneurs can also have financial skills, crisis recovery, adaptation, and digitalization more flexible requirements for small public contracts. schools and universities for both men and women, Fourth, also important promote the adoption promoting academy-industry partnerships. Although standardized monitoring and evaluation systems for survey data suggests major difference the adoption entrepreneurship programs. Making firm-level data technologies between men and women once women more widely available with comparable indicators for reach certain level digital skills, micro-level firm data entrepreneurship the national and sub-national shows fewer women own businesses the digital sector, levels across Central America would significantly help and fewer women work high tech and digital services. the delivery evidence-based policy. Suggested Increasing the participation women training programs responsible agencies and time frames: ministries and supporting women digital entrepreneurs can enhance economy and innovation agencies. Medium term. women role the digital sector. Creating awareness the importance gender considerations program Provide transformation awards. Providing annual design among governments and supporting organizations digital transformation awards for Central American critical. Developing targeted industry-specific programs firms that have translated technologies into growth that build the capacities women entrepreneurs could motivate more firms test new technologies. technology and managerial skills has been demonstrated These awards could sponsored large technology promote the success women. Showcasing companies, regional governments, and Central American examples and success stories women leaders builds Integration System institutions. Suggested responsible the confidence female entrepreneurs. Once women agencies: CENPROMYPE, ministries economy and acquire digital and managerial skills, leadership vital innovation agencies, and business associations, such increasing female entrepreneurship. Mentoring and chambers industry and chambers commerce. Time frame: Medium term. OVAT CEN ANNEX LIST PROGRAMS THAT SUPPORT THE ENTREPRENEURSHIP ECOSYSTEM COSTA RICA, SALVADOR, GUATEMALA, AND HONDURAS A.1 TOTAL LIST PROGRAMS Instituto Nacional Fomento Cooperativo (INFOCOOP) Instituto Nacional Mujer (INAMU) Number Programs Identified 241 MICIT (Ministerion Innovación, Tecnologia Number Survey Respondents 118 Telecomunicaciones) Digital Technologies Incubation MEIC (Ministerio Economía, Inversión Comercio) Programs (CR: Parque Tec, Tec Emprende Lab, AUGE, CEI-UCI, CCCR; 10. Ministerio Agricultura GT: Campus Tec, Progreso UVG, USAC; HN: HDC, HUB UNITEC) 11. Ministerio Ambiente, Energia Telecomunicaciones (MINAE) Source: Consultations with the Ministries Economy and MSME agencies. Note: Inventory institutions gathered during IFC Digital Entrepreneurship Diagnostic. AUGE=Agencia Universitaria para Gestión del Emprendimiento 12. Ministerio Trabajo Seguridad Social Universidad Costa Rica. CEI-UCI= Centro Emprendimiento Innovación Universidad para Cooperación Internacional. UVG= Universidad del Valle Guatemala. USAC= Universidad San Carlos. UNITEC= Universidad 13. PROCOMER (Costa Rica Trade Promotion Agency) Tecnológica Hondura. 14. Correos Costa Rica (Costa Rica National Postal Services) A.2 COSTA RICA: LIST PROGRAMS THAT SUPPORT PRIVATE ORGANIZATIONS ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND NGOs Asociación Empresarial para Desarrollo (AED) Number Programs Identified Asociación GS1 Costa Rica Number Survey Respondents Costa Rica Innova (CRINNOVA) Digital Technologies Incubation Programs (Parque Tec, Tec Emprende Cámara Comercio Costa Rica (CCCR) Lab, AUGE, CEI-UCI, CCCR) Cámara Exportadores Costa Rica (CADEXCO) Source: Consultations with the Ministry Economy, Investment and Commerce (MEIC). Ministry Communication, Innovation and Technologies Cámara Industrias (CICR) (MICIT) Registry Incubators New Technology-Based Firms. Note: Inventory institutions gathered during IFC Digital Entrepreneurship Diagnostic. AUGE=Agencia Universitaria para Gestión del Emprendimiento Centro Nacional Producción más Limpia (CNP+L) Universidad Costa Rica. CEI-UCI= Centro Emprendimiento Innovación Universidad para Cooperación Internacional. Camara Nacional Comerciantes Detallistas Afines (CANACODEA) GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS: Camara Textileros Costarricenses (CATECO) Banco Nacional Costa Rica 10. Cámara Tecnologías Información Banco Popular Desarrollo Comunal (BPDC) Comunicación- CAMTIC Instituto Costarricense Turismo 11. Centro Emprendimiento CEI-UCI Instituto Nacional Aprendizaje 12. Colegio Universitario Cartago (CUC) Instituto Costarricense Eléctricidad (ICE) 13. Consejo Nacional para Investigación Científica Tecnológica (CONICIT) ECO DAT 14. Tecnologico Costa Rica Universidad Técnica Nacional (UTN) 15. Cooperativa Servicios Mujeres Productoras Colegio Universitario Limón (CUNLIMON) Empresarias (COOPEMUPRO) Universidad Católica Costa Rica (UCATOLICA) 16. Fundación Centro Gestión Tecnológica Informática Industrial (CEGESTI) Universidad Costa Rica (UCR) 17. Fundación Omar Dengo (FOD) Universidad San Marcos (USAM) 18. Fundación para Desarrollo Sostenible Universidad Estatal Distancia (UNED) Pequeña Mediana Empresa (FUNDES) Universidad Latinoamericana Ciencia 19. Grupo Financiero IMPROSA (GFI) Tecnología, (ULACIT) 20. Instituto Nacional Biodiversidad (INBIO) ULEADS (LEAD University) 21. Instituto Nacional Seguros (INS) 10. Universidad Nacional Costa Rica (UNA) 22. Instituto Normas Técnicas Costa Rica (INTECO) 11. Universidad Técnica Nacional (UTN) 23. Junta Administradora Portuaria del Desarrollo 12. Tecnológico Costa Rica- TEC Emprende LAB Vertiente Atlántica (JAPDEVA) A.3 SALVADOR: LIST 24. ParqueTec PROGRAMS THAT SUPPORT 25. Red Costarricense Organizaciones para ENTREPRENEURSHIP Microempresa (REDCOM) Number Programs Identified 26. Sistema Banca para Desarrollo (SBD) Number Survey Respondents 27. Zona Económica Especial Cartago (ZEE) Digital Technologies Incubation Programs FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS Source: Ministry Economy, CONAMYPE, BANDESAL, GEM Report 2017. Note: IFC Digital Entrepreneuship Diagnostic. Sistema Banca para Desarrollo (SBD-public) Banco Crédito Agrícola Cartago (BanCrédito) GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS: Banco Improsa Secretaríat Innovation (Secretaría Innovación) CONAMYPE (National Commission for Micro and Banco Promerica Small Enterprises) Bac San José (BAC) Secretariat Innovation (Secretaría Innovación) Bolsa Nacional Valores (BOLSACR) Ministry Agriculture and Livestock Financiera DESYFIN S.A. Ministry Economy (MINEC) Ministry Tourism CORSATUR Grupo Financiero IMPROSA (GFI) PROESA (Investment and Export Promotion Program) ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS AND National Institute for Youth (INJUVE) UNIVERSITIES INSAFORP (National Institute for Professional Training) Instituto Tecnológico Costa Rica (ITCR) 10. Banco Desarrollo Salvador (BANDESAL) OVAT CEN 11. Banco Fomento Agropecuario (BFA) 21. Glasswing 12. Ministry Educación (MINED) 22. Hecho Casa 13. Ministry Foreign Affairs (MRREE) 23. HUB 170 14. Ministry Labor and Social Prevention (MTPS) 24. Impact HUB 15. Fondo Inversió Social para Desarrollo Local (FISDL) 25. INNBOX 16. Fondo Solidario para Familia Microempresaria (FOSOFAMILIA) 26. Innogen Capital PRIVATE ORGANIZATIONS 27. INSERT YAWAL AND NGOs 28. ITCA (Instituto Tecnico Centroamericano) ADEL Morazán (Local Development Association Morazán) 29. ITCHA (Instituto Tecnologico Chalatenango) ASI Salvadorean Manufacturers Association 30. Seeds Community SNDBX B-Peace Salvador 31. World Vision Banco Hipotecario ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS AND CASATIC (Camara Salvadoreña Tecnologia UNIVERSITIES informacion Comunicaciones) Escuela Superior Economia Negocios Chamber Commerce Universidad Centroamericana Jose Simeón Cañas Fondo Empresarial para Acción Social (FUNDEMAS) Universidad Dr. José Matías Delgado Fundación Salvador del Mundo (FUSALMO) Universidad Don Bosco Fundación Gloria Kriete KODIGO Universidad Evangelica Salvador (UES) 10. Fundación Salvadoreña para Desarrollo (FUSADES) Universidad Gerardo Barrios 11. ITCA FEPADE (Instituto Tecnologico Centroamericano Fundación Empresarial para Desarrollo) Universidad Francisco Gavidia 12. Kodigo Fundación Gloria Kriete Universidad Monica Herrera 13. Joven360 MULTILATERAL ORGANIZATIONS 14. Vital Voices AND DONORS Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 15. Mercadito Banco Interamericano Desarrollo (BID) 16. Impact Hub United States Agency for International Development 17. Ashoka (USAID) 18. Emprende Inversiones Swisscontact 19. Pomona Impact International Organization for Migration (OIM) 20. ACDMYPE (Asociación Centros Desarrollo International Labor Organization (ILO) Empresarial Micro Pequeña Empresa). ECO DAT A.4 GUATEMALA: LIST 16. Guatemalan Institute Tourism PROGRAMS THAT SUPPORT 17. Ministerio Economía Unidad Fortalecimiento ENTREPRENEURSHIP Emprendimiento 18. Ministerio Agricultura Number Programs Identified 19. MINECO Programa Articulación Productiva Number Survey Respondents PRIVATE ORGANIZATIONS’ Digital Technologies and Innovation PROGRAMS AND NGOs Incubation Programs: Campus Tec, Universidad del Valle Guatemala, Aceleremos Guate Progreso University San Carlos AGEXPORT: Asociación Guatemalteca Exportadores Source: Consultations with the Ministry Economy Unit Entrepreneurship. Note: IFC Digital Entrepreneuship Diagnostic. ANDE (Aspen Network Development) Asociación Emprendedores Guatemala GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS ASOPYME BANRURAL (Banco Desarrollo Rural) BANTRAB (Banco los Trabajadores) Centro Municipal Emprendimiento CME, MUNI Guatemala Legalis MINECO Programa Promoción Comercial Cámara Comercio Guatemala Universidad San Carlos Guatemala Facultad Cámara Comercio Guatemalteco Americana Agronomía USAC AMCHAM Universidad San Carlos Guatemala Facultad 10. Cámara Industria Guatemala Ciencias Económicas USAC 11. Campus Tecnológico Guatemala -Campus Tec- Universidad San Carlos Guatemala Facultad Ingeniería USAC 12. CECI Centro estudio cooperación internacional Dirección General Investigación USAC 13. Chamba Coworking Incubadora Municipal Empresas Villa Nueva 14. Chapines Chispudos INTECAP (Instituo Técnico Capacitación) 15. Emprende 502 10. National Secretariat Science and Technology 16. Emprende (SENACYT) 17. EMPRENDEDORES 11. MINECO Centros dinamización económica 18. Enactus Guatemala 12. Ministerio Agricultura, Ganadería Alimentación 19. FHL CONSULTING (MAGA) 20. Foro Emprendedoras 13. National Competitiveness Program (PRONACOM) 21. Alterna 14. Ministry Education (MINEDUC) 22. Fundación Génesis Empresarial 15. Ministry Labor and Social Prevention (MINTRAB) 23. Fundesa OVAT CEN 24. Consortium 53. Transformaciones del Caribe 25. Good Neighbors 54. Voces Vitales 26. Guatetrending 55. Walt Whitman American Center IGA 27. HEIFER International 56. Yuxtem 28. How Fun Studio 57. Academia 29. Impacto Empresarial 58. Universidad del Valle Guatemala 30. JUNKABAL 59. Universidad Internaciones -UNI- 31. KINAL 60. Universidad Rafael Landívar 32. Universidad Francisco Marroquin Kirzner Center A.5 HONDURAS: LIST for Entrepreneurship PROGRAMS THAT SUPPORT 33. LEGALSA ENTREPRENEURSHIP 34. Mercy Corps Number Institutions Identified 35. Mejoremos Guate Number Survey Respondents 36. Multiverse Digital Technologies Incubation Programs: Honduras Digital Challenge; 37. NEGU HUB UNITEC 38. Plan Internacional Source: Consultations with SENPRENDE. 39. Pomona Impact Note: IFC Digital Entrepreneuship Diagnostic. 40. PRODETUR (Promotora para Desarrollo Turistico) GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS 41. Progreso IHCIETI Instituto Hondureño Ciencia, 42. Red Instituciones Microfinanzas Tecnología Innovación) Guatemala, REDIMIF BANHPROVI Banco Hondureño para Producción 43. Red Nacional Grupos Gestores Vivienda 44. Root Capital Economia Naranja 45. She Works Credito Solidario 46. Semilla Nueva ARSA Agencia Regulación Sanitaria 47. Socialab Instituto Propiedad 48. Swisscontact Alcalde Municipal San Pedro Sula 49. Training Day Grupo Veraz Alcaldia Municipal Tegucigalpa 50. TECHNOSERVE Secretaria Desarrollo Económico 51. Tigo Business 10. Secretaria Turismo 52. TGB Consulting 11. Secretaria Trabajo Seguridad Social ECO DAT 12. Comision Nacional Bancos Seguros (CNBS) 19. CDE-Mosquitia 13. Honduras Central Bank (BCH) 20. CDE-El Paraiso 14. Congreso Nacional 21. CDE-Lean 15. ONCAE (Oficina Normativa Contratación 22. CDE-12 Centro Adquisiciones) 23. CDE-Arrecife 16. Consejo Nacional Inversiones 24. Honduras Digital Challenge 17. Secretaría Agricultura (SAG) 25. C&D Technologia 18. Instituciones Publico/Privada 26. CARE Internacional 19. Central American Bank for Economic Integration 27. Fundación Capital PRIVATE ORGANIZATIONS’ 28. GOAL PROGRAMS AND NGOs 29. Heifer Cámara Comercio Industrias Tegucigalpa 30. Impact Hub Tegucigalpa Bazar del Sábado 31. OXFAM Cámara Comercio Industrias Cortes 32. Rainforest Alliance FUNDER Fundación para Desarrollo Rural 33. Red Latinoamericana Universidades por FEDECAMARA Federación Cámaras Emprendedurismo Social- RedUnEs Comercio Honduras 34. Swiss Contact COHDESSE Consejo Hondureño del Sector Social Economía 35. ARA Development Asociación Nacional para Mediana Pequeña 36. CONSUCOOP Consejo Nacional Supervisor las Empresa (ANMPIH) Cooperativas Consejo Hondureño Empresa Privada (COHEP) 37. REDCAN Red Centroamericana Negocios VOCES VITALES 38. Dacotrans 10. IMPACT HUB UNIVERSITIES 11. Red Centros Desarrollo Honduras Universidad Politécnica Ingenieros 12. CDE-Comayagua (Centro Desarrollo Empresarial) Universidad Zamorano 13. CDE-Golfo Fonseca Universidad tecnológica Centro América 14. CDE-Olancho Universidad Tecnológica Honduras HUB UNITEC 15. CDE-Coordillera Nombre Dios Universidad Autónoma Honduras 16. CDE-Santa Bárbara Universidad Católica Honduras 17. CDE-Lempa Universidad Metropolitana Honduras 18. CDE-Occidente OVAT CEN ANNEX SERVICES PROVIDED PROGRAMS THAT SUPPORT ENTREPRENEURSHIP Costa Rica: Main services provided public instruments across pillars the entrepreneurship ecosystem. Technology parks, research incubators and accelerators Budget 2019 Colones Collaborative networks Technology adoption Grants and vouchers Public procurement Business education Credit guarantees Co-working space, Focus women Loans and credit infraestructure Tax incentives Equity finance and markets Name the Institutuon Program services Policy CORREOS COSTA RICA Pymexpress Ministerio Ciencia, Tecnología Fondo Propyme Telecomunicaciones Programa Instituto Nacional Nacional las Mujeres Mujeres Empresarias 50,000,000 3,064,250 Promotora Ramp-up Seed Comercio Exterior Costa Rica 1,935,360,015 MEIC PYME DIGITAL Consejo Nacional Fondo Incentivos, para Investigaciones Ley 7169; Fondo Científificas Propyme, Ley 8262; Tecnológicas Programa Innovación Capital Humano para Competitvdad, Ley 9218 Total Budgets Public Policy Instruments that Support the Entrepreneurship Ecosystem 1,988,424,265 ECO DAT Costa Rica: Main services provided supporting organizations across pillars the entrepreneurship ecosystem. Technology Access Finance Adoption R&D Technology parks, research incubators and accelerators Collaborative networks Institutuon Name Technology adoption Grants and vouchers Public procurement Business education Credit guarantees Co-working space, Focus women Loans and credit infraestructure Tax incentives Equity finance the Program and markets services Policy COOPERATIVA SERVICIOS MUJERES PRODUCTORAS MICROEMPRESARIAS, COOPEMUPRO, R.L. (ULACIT) Parque Tec TEC Emprendre LAB, Tecnológico Costa Rica CIEBT Bolsa Nacional Valores CEGESTI EDUARDO ROJAS FERNANDEZ Cámara Exportadores Costa Rica (CADEXCO) Alianza Empresarial para Desarrollo Colegio Universitario Limón OVAT CEN Salvador: Main services provided public instruments across pillars the entrepreneurship ecosystem Supply pillars Barriers Demand pillars Managerial training Access finance Human capital Budget 2019 infrastructure Market access Tech adoption Collaboration Regulations equipment Change Access Access Program mindset Agency Banca Mujer 2,241,900 BANDESAL Banca Mujer 1,182,494 Fondo Mujer 454,234 Banca Emprendes 480,763 Desarrollo 626,641 Artesanal Emp Femenina 87,408 Pueblo 278,000 Producto CONAMYPE Formalización Financiera Compras Públicas 50,000 Desarrollo 25,000 Proveedores Corredores 3,239,403 Productivos Acceso Mercados 50,000 InnovaEmprende MINEC Innovatics 100,000 3,300,000 Fodepro Budget 2019 3,615,344 1,100,000 8,333 1,503,130 724,848 1,509,880 2,376,783 1,277,525 12,115,843 ECO DAT Salvador: Main services provided supporting organizations across pillars the entrepreneurship ecosystem Supply pillars Barriers Demand pillars Managerial training Access finance Human capital infrastructure Market access Tech adoption Collaboration Regulations equipment Change Access Access mindset Budget 2019 203,866 82,184 10,000 2,190,048 332,438 135,264 2,741,084 2,528,367 OVAT CEN Guatemala: Main services provided public instruments across pillars the entrepreneurship ecosystem Technology Access Finance Adoption R&D Technology parks, research incubators and accelerators Collaborative networks Technology adoption Grants and vouchers Public procurement Business education Credit guarantees Co-working space, Budget 2019 USD Focus women Loans and credit infraestructure Tax incentives Equity finance and markets Name the Institutuon Program services Policy Micro, Small and BANRURAL Medium Enterprise 315,000 Program Promoting Entrepreneurship 2,287,582 Culture and Networks Pre-incubación, Incubación Aceleración 2,269,780 emprendimientos MIPYMES MINECO Proyectos Competitivdad, Inversión 425,551 Clima Negocios Innovaction and Associativity for Handcrafts Strengthening MAG Productivity and n/a Markets Capacity building for MINED Entrepreneurship n/a (Basicos Middle School Level) -EMPRENDE CTI SENACYT TRANSFIERE CTI 1,454,475 SEC Obras Women Economic Sociales Empowerment 1,899,103 Faculty Engineering -Entrepreneurship Center Engineers 16,213 General Research Center USAC -Research and Industrial 90,791 Development Faculty Economics -Pre-Incuación 16,213 Emprendedores, Coaching para emprendedores Banco Nacional CONJUVE Oportunidades n/a INTECAP INTECAP (public-private) n/a Municipality Guatemala Entrepreneurship Center 116,732 Total Budgets Public Policy Instruments that Support the Entrepreneurship Ecosystem 8,891,438 ECO DAT Guatemala: Main services provided supporting organizations across pillars the entrepreneurship ecosystem Technology Access Finance Adoption R&D Technology parks, research incubators and accelerators Collaborative networks Technology adoption Grants and vouchers Public procurement Business education Credit guarantees Budget 2019 USD Co-working space, Focus women Loans and credit infraestructure Tax incentives Equity finance and markets services Policy LEGALSA Startups LEGALSA 28,015.56 Campus Tecnológico S.A. 151,311.40 Fundesa 64,850.84 Red Nacional Grupos Gestores 70,000.00 Centro Estudio Cooperación Internacional, CECI 501,028.02 Universidad Rafael Landivar How Fun Studio Progreso S.A. 648,508.43 Multiverse 303,501.95 Technoserve 131,258.11 Aspen Network Development 172,774.32 Entrepreneurs Swisscontact 311,284.05 Legals 2,594.03 Asociación para inversión, innovación emprendimiento 16,861.22 Guatemala ASEGUA Cámara industria Guatemala 19,727.63 PRODETUR centro desarrollo 429,976.65 empresarial innovación, CDEIN Centro Estudio Cooperación Internacional, CECI 5,188.07 Walt Whitman American Center 64,850.84 Fundación Vital Voices 16.21 Centro Emprendimiento 3,242.54 Las Buganvilias Guatetrending 46,692.61 Asociación Guatemalteca Exportadores 38,910.51 Universidad del Valle Guatemala 123,216.60 Impacto Empresarial Consultores Asociados Centro Emprendimiento Kirzner 500,000.00 Heifer Internacional Guatemala 428,015.56 Banco los Trabajadores 194,552.53 Total Budgets Intermediary Organizations that Support the Entrepreneurship Ecosystem 4,256,377.68 OVAT CEN Honduras: Main services provided public instruments across pillars the entrepreneurship ecosystem Technology Access Finance Adoption R&D Technology parks, research incubators and accelerators Collaborative networks Technology adoption Grants and vouchers Public procurement Business education Credit guarantees Co-working space, Budget 2019 USD Focus women Loans and credit infraestructure Tax incentives Equity finance and markets Institutuon services Policy Secretaría Desarrollo Económico 13,500,000.00 Secretaría Estado Despacho Desarrollo Económico 3,827,210.00 Comisión Naranja Gerencia Competitividad Alcaldía 2,150,000.00 Municipal San Pedro Sula Prospera Consortium 1,000,000.00 Instituto Hondureño Ciencia, Tecnología Innovación (IHCIETI) 40,000,000.00 Secretaría Nacional Ciencia, Tecnología Secretaría Desarrollo Económico 3,000,000.00 SENPRENDE Secretaría Trabajo Seguridad Social 8,343,633.62 Secretaría Agricultura Ganadería 2,236,739,882.00 Total Budgets Public Policy Instruments that Support the Entrepreneurship Ecosystem 2,308,560,726 ECO DAT Honduras: Main services provided supporting organizations across pillars the entrepreneurship ecosystem Technology Access Finance Adoption R&D Technology parks, research Collaborative networks Technology adoption Grants and vouchers Public procurement Business education Co-working space, Credit guarantees Focus women Loans and credit infraestructure incubators and Tax incentives Equity finance and markets accelerators Budget USD services Policy CDE MIPYME Región Occidente 1,306,474.20 Voces Vitales Honduras 63,286.00 Fundación Eléutera 16,227.18 CDE MIPYME REGIÓN SANTA BARBARA 0.89 CDE MIPYME REGIÓN VALLE LEAN 116,835.70 CIRCUITOS DESARROLLOS TECNOLOGIA 3,245.44 CDE MIPYME REGIÓN PARAISO 115,618.66 CDE MIPYME REGIÓN MOSQUITA 83,410.30 CDE MIPYME REGIÓN VALLES OLANCHO 129,817.44 Cámara Comercio Industria 316,105.48 Tegucigalpa (CCIT) Universidad Nacional Autonoma Honduras CDE Mipyme Cordillera Nombre Dios 89,249.49 HUB UNITEC 24,340.77 ANMPIH FEDECAMARA 20,283.98 CDE MIPYME Golfo Fonseca 704,423.53 Honduras Digital Challenge 528,556.80 Founder Institute Honduras 4,868.15 Total Budgets Intermediary Organizations that Support the Entrepreneurship Ecosystem 3,522,744 Total Sum CDE Public-Private 2,749,562 CDE Total Supporting Instruments 78% OVAT CEN ANNEX LIST STAKEHOLDERS, SURVEY RESPONDENTS, AND PARTICIPANTS FOCUS GROUPS C.1 CENPROMYPE Universidad Latinoamericana Ciencia Tecnología (ULACIT) Coordination and consultations for the study Marcelo Lebendiker, Presidente, Parque Tec Miosotis Rivas Peña, former Executive Director Rytha Picado Arroyo, Coordinadora TEC Emprende David Cabrera, Acting Executive Director LAB, TEC Emprende LAB, Tecnológico Costa Rica Roxana Durán Ayala. Public Policy Manager Oscar Chavarria Salazar, Gestor, Centro Incubación Empresas Base Tecnológica (CIEBT) Leonardo Aguilar, e-Commerce Specialist María Brenes Quesada, Directora Negocios Katya Moreira, Business Services Coordinator Relaciones Corporativas, Bolsa Nacional Valores Michelle Herrera, Entrepreneurship Coordinator FUNDES Milton Merino, Systems and Statistics Coordinator Daira Gómez, Directora Ejecutiva, CEGESTI C.2 COSTA RICA Eduardo Rojas Fernández, Asesor Turístico/ Técnico Turismo Respondents public programs survey Walter Delangton Villavicencio, Director Ejecutivo, Adelita Arce Rodríguez, Jefe Secretaría Técnica Cámara Exportadores Costa Rica (CADEXCO) Incentivos, Ministerio Ciencia, Tecnología Telecomunicaciones María Fernanda Pérez Fernández, Directora Dimensión Económica, Alianza Empresarial para Desarrollo Alejandra Rojas Núñez, Profesional Especialista, Instituto Nacional las Mujeres Daniel Agames Acuña, Director a.i. Planeamiento Desarrollo, Colegio Universitario Limón Priscilla Morera, Gestora Incubación Aceleración, Promotora Comercio Exterior Rodolfo Molina, Presidente, Cámara Textil Costarricense (CATECO) Gabriela León Segura, Directora, MEIC Participants functional analysis focus group Stephanie Vargas Alvarado, Dirección Investigación desarrollo innovación, Correos Costa Rica Gabriela León, Ministerio Economía, Industria Comercio Alejandra Arayo Marroni, Coordinadora Carola Medina, Ministerio Ciencia, Tecnología Unidad Evaluación Técnica, Consejo Nacional Telecomunicaciones (MICITT) para Investigaciones Científicas Tecnológicas John Molina, Instituto Costarricense Electricidad (ICE) Diego Ching Vindas, Coordinador Emprendimiento Priscilla Morera, Promotora del Comercio Exterior Innovación, Sistema Banca para Desarrollo Costa Rica (PROCOMER) Respondents intermediary organizations survey Allan Matarrita, The Sonar Company Marta Campos Méndez, Gerente, Cooperativa Cesar Pablo Enriquez, Universidad Latinoamericana Servicios Mujeres Productoras Microempresarias Ciencia Tecnología (ULACIT) (COOPEMUPRO, R.L.) Alvaro Villalobos Bonilla, ULACIT César Enríquez Caruzo, Director Académico Facultad Ciencias Empresariales Guillaume Pollock, CAMTIC Diego Ching, SBDR-CR ECO DAT Adrian García, Carao Ventures Daniel Armando López Alvarado, Director Ejecutivo, Centro Desarrollo Empresarial Micro, Johnny Aguirre, WoWeMotions Pequeña Mediana Empresa Región Santa Barbara Luis Ortiz, IbyLit Kelly Johana Alemán, Directora Ejecutiva, Cde MIPYME Región Valle Lean Bryan Navarro, Imagine XYZ Edwyn Tizado, Director Comercial, Circuitos Cesar Rodriguez Bravo, ULeads Desarrollos Tecnología Rytha Picado, TEC Lab Luz del Carmen Godoy Martel, Directora Ejecutiva, Victor Acosta, Banco Nacional Cde MIPYME Región Paraíso Ximena Lacayo, Banco América Central (BAC) Terry Heston Martinez, Director Ejecutivo, Cde MIPYME Región Mosquitia Alejandra Araya Juan Carlos Paz, Director, Centro Desarrollo C.3 HONDURAS Empresarial Región Valles Olancho Karla Jackeline Ruiz Betancourt, Gerente General, Respondents public programs survey Cámara Comercio Industria Tegucigalpa (CCIT) Aída Rodríguez, Directora Promoción Julio Raudales Torres, Vicerrector Relaciones Internacional, Secretaría Desarrollo Económico Internacionales, Universidad Nacional Autónoma María Emelinda Lara, Directora General Sectores Honduras Productivos, Secretaría Estado Despacho Ingrid Montes Oca Soto, Directora Ejecutiva, CDE Desarrollo Económico MIPYME Cordillera Nombre Dios Claudia Avila, Coordinadora Nacional del Servicio Ángel Josué Reyes, Coordinador Emprendimiento, Empleo, Secretaría Trabajo Seguridad Social HUB UNITEC Ricardo Arturo Peña Ramirez, Director Unidad Julio Escoto Córdova, Director Ejecutivo, Asociación Planeamiento Evaluación Gestión, Secretaría Nacional Mediana Pequeña Industria Agricultura Ganadería Honduras, ANMPIH Lorenza Durón, Comisionada, Comisión Naranja Ana Velasquez Mancia, Coordinadora Proyectos, José Antonio Díaz Valladares, Gerente FEDECAMARA Competitividad, Gerencia Competitividad Alcaldía Digna Elizabeth García Vasquez, Asesor Monitoreo, Municipal San Pedro Sula CDE MIPYME Golfo Fonseca Ana Romero, Sub Directora Ejecutiva, Instituto Kevin Dubón, Coordinador Técnico, Honduras Digital Hondureño Ciencia, Tecnología Innovación Challenge (IHCIETI) /Secretaría Nacional Ciencia Tecnología Jacinto Enrique Cho Escobar, Director, Founder Noé Fernando Escalante, Encargado Asistencia Institute Honduras Técnica, SENPRENDE Participants functional analysis focus groups Gabriela Montenegro, Directora, Prospera Consortium Roxana Durán, CENPROMYPE Respondents intermediary organizations survey Andrea Caminals, SENPRENDE Jose Octavio Alvarado Herrera, Responsable Unidad Gestión Proyectos, Centro Desarrollo Wendy Molina, SENPRENDE Empresarial Para MIPYME Región Occidente Ricardo Alemán, SENPRENDE Sully Pacheco, Directora Ejecutiva, Voces Vitales Honduras Karla Ruiz, Cámara Comercio Industria Tegucigalpa Elena Toledo, Directora Ejecutiva, Fundación Eleutera OVAT CEN Yuliana Valladares, Asociación Empresas C.4 GUATEMALA Tecnología, ASEMTECH Respondents public programs survey David Sandino, Founder Institute Honduras Héctor Byron Garrido, Jefe Planificación, INTECAP Jacinto Cho, Founder Institute Honduras Henry Stuardo Ortíz Paiz, Jefe del Departamento Julio Escoto, Asociación Nacional Micro Pequeña Comercio Mercadeo, Ministerio Agricultura, Industria Honduras Ganadería Alimentación Esperanza Escobar, Asociación Nacional Micro Olga Elisa Contreras Solórzano, Encargada Pequeña Industria Honduras Dirección Generación Transferencia Conocimiento, Secretaría Nacional Ciencia Carolina Estrada Zelaya, ANDI Tecnología (SENACYT) Ángel Josué Reyes, Hub UNITEC José Francisco, Ruiz Guerra, Asesor Gabriela Torres, UNITEC, Tech4Dev Emprendimiento Innovación, Ministerio Economía Elena Toledo, Fundación Eleutera Adalgiza Reina, Asesora Articulación Productiva Inserción Cooperativas, Ministerio Economía Bessy Bendana, Comisión Naranja Myra Lucrecia Zamora Sum, Técnico Edgardo Flores, Think Digital Telesecundaria Ministerio Educación Alejandra Nazar Kafati, Think Digital Nora Leonor Garcia Tobar, Encargada Area Emprendimiento, Facultad Ingeniería, Universidad Mario Nazar, Cloud Biz San Carlos Guatemala Isaac Ferrera, Escuela Agrícola Zamorano Facultad Ciencias Económicas, Universidad José Elvin Salgado, Dr. San Carlos Guatemala, Centro Emprendimiento Emprendec Eduardo Facusse, Empresario Liuba María Cabrera Villagran, Coordinadora José Luis Moncada, Banco Atlantida, HDC Programa Universitario Investigación Desarrollo Industrial PUIDI Alimentación Kevin Dubon, Banco Atlántida, HDC Nutrición PRUNIAN, Dirección General Jimerson Asencio, FICOHSA Investigación, Universidad USAC José Dubon, Centro Desarrollo Empresarial, Julio Raúl Suarez, Gerente MIPYME, Banco Región Occidente Desarrollo Rural, Sociedad Anónima Elder Fuentes, Centro Desarrollo Empresarial, Amán José Sánchez, Asesor Clima Negocios, Región Occidente Programa Nacional Competitividad Lixa Hernández, SENPRENDE Sharon Girón, Asesor Proyectos, Secretaría Obras Sociales Esposa del Presidente Wendy Ventura, SENPRENDE Arnoldo Rafael Rodríguez Maldonado, Coordinador Wendy Orellana, SENPRENDE Banco Nacional Oportunidades -BANOP, Consejo Nacional Juventud (CONJUVE) Victor Ortíz Josefina Sontay, Coordinador General, Centro Municipal Marco Calderón Emprendimiento, Municipalidad Guatemala Ricardo Nohé Centeno Sierra Respondents intermediary organizations survey Jose Bassila, Abogado Asociado, LEGALSA Startups LEGALSA ECO DAT Andrés Hermés, Encargado Incubadoras Carolina Uribe, Directora, Centro Emprendimiento Relaciones Institucionales, Campus Tecnológico S.A. Kirzner Juan Carlos Zapata, Director Ejecutivo, Fundesa Gustavo Hernandez Polanco, Director Nacional, Heifer International Guatemala Red Nacional Grupos Gestores Carmen Ortiz, Directora Corporativa Silvia Cotton, Centro Estudio Cooperación Comunicación Mercadeo, Banco los Trabajadores Internacional (CECI) Participants functional analysis focus group Olivia Arango, Coordinadora Académica, Universidad Rafael Landívar Alvaro Navarro, Soltecorp Manuel Martinez, Cofundador, How Fun Studio Andrea Mazariegos, Swiss Contact Erick Melgar, Gerente General, Progreso S.A. Carlos Morales, Chemonics International (Agribusiness Innovation Project) Ricardo Gavidia, Process Officer, Multiverse Cesar Rodas, SIB Innovation Hub Fernando Escalante, Coordinador Programa, Technoserve Erik Castellanos, BANTRAB Evelyn Hernandez, Coordinadora Senior Capítulo Francisco Rivera, BANTRAB Centroamérica México, Aspen Network Development Entrepreneurs Neftali León, BANTRAB Kurt Schneider, Director País, Swisscontact Nestor Sagastume, BANTRAB Ana Lucia Barrios Solares, Gerente General, Legalis Francisco Ruiz, MINECO José Rivas, Presidente, Asociación para inversión, Gerardo Martinez, SolandTec innovación emprendimiento Guatemala (ASEGUA) Andrés Hermés, Campus TEC Lesly Estrada, Coordinadora Guatemala Emprende, Kenya Armas, Universidad San Carlos Cámara Industria Guatemala Lesly Estrada, Cámara Industria Guatemala Lucia Barreda, Directora, PRODETUR Centro Desarrollo Empresarial Innovación, CDEIN Mónica Stein, Universidad del Valle Guatemala Ana Rosa Orozco, Directora, Walt Whitman María Zaghi, Comercializadora American Center Mónica Zelaya, Universidad Francisco Marroquín Stephanie Ruiz, Directora Ejecutiva, Fundación Vital Voices Carlos Arana, Gran Sorpresa Carnicería Heidy Mariela Hichos Posadas, Coordinadora del Evelyn Juarez, Scale Up, FUNDESA Centro, Centro Emprendimiento Las Buganvilias Indyra Whitman, Queen Pizza Daniel Roman, CEO, Guatetrending C.5 SALVADOR Rosy Dardón, Jefe Ruta para internacionalización, Asociación Guatemalteca Respondents public programs survey Exportadores Ministerio Economía (MINEC) Monica Stein, Vicerrectora Investigación Vinculación, Universidad del Valle Guatemala Secretaría Innovación Hugo Cabrera, Director Ejecutivo, Impacto Comisión Nacional Micro Pequeña Empresa Empresarial Consultores Asociados (CONAMYPE) OVAT CEN Banco Desarrollo Salvador (BANDESAL) Christian Quiñonez, Innogen Capital Organismo Promotor Exportaciones Inversiones Rodrigo Dumont, Innogen Capital Salvador (PROESA) Claudia Rodriguez, CASATIC Ministerio Agricultura Ganadería (MAG) Eduardo Francés, Hugo Ventures Instituto Juventud (INJUVE) Jose Mario Avila, Hugo Ventures Fondo Inversión Social para Desarrollo Local (FISDL/MDR) Ricardo Cruz, Hugo Ventures Banco Fomento Agropecuario (BFA) Iliana Benitez, Vertex Studio Respondents intermediary organizations survey Iris Palma, ASI Fundación Salvadoreña para Desarrollo Económico Karla Dominguez, ASI Social (FUSADES) Jose Luis Barreto, Pulpo Fintech IMPACT HUB Jose Roberto Rodriguez, Impact Hub B-PEACE Luz Maria Portillo, ABANSA ASÍ Samuel Salazar, PROINNOVA/FUSADES Cámara Comercio Luis Martinez Perdomo, Universidad Francisco Gavidia ADEL Morazán C.6 REGIONAL FOCUS Cámara Salvadoreña Tecnologías Información Comunicaciones (CASATIC) GROUP FOR REGULATORY ADEL San Miguel ENVIRONMENT Participants focus group Universidad Gerardo Barrios Roxana Durán, CENPROMYPE Voces Vitales Amán Sánchez, MINECO, Guatemala Seed Community Ana Lucia Barrios, Legalis Mercadito Andrea Mazariegos, SWC Escuela Comunicación Monica Herrera Blanca Mejia, Bufete Mejía Escuela Superior Economía Negocios (ESEN) Christian Betancourt, Consortium Legal Universidad Católica Salvador (UNICAES) Elena Toledo- Eleutera Universidad Oriente (UNIVO) Jackie Foglia Sandoval, CNI-HN ADEL Unión José Luis Moncada, HND Digital Challenge Asociación Instituciones Operadoras Centros Desarrollo Micro Pequeña Empresa (ACDMYPE) Frank Reinaldo Tosta, SENPRENDE-HND WEAMERICAS Kevin Dubon, HND Digital Challenge Participants functional analysis focus group Marjorie Chorro Trigueros, FUSADES Alejandro Gomez Fernández, Banco Agrícola ECO DAT ANNEX SURVEY DEMAND FOR DIGITAL SERVICES KEY SECTORS D.1 SAMPLE The survey was performed October 2020–17 January 2021; total 2,806 firms started the This survey leveraged online survey methods survey, and 1,906 completed it. Twenty-six percent and online survey firm proprietary panel are micro-enterprises with 1-4 employees, percent respondents. The online survey process differs from are small firms with 5-19 employees, percent traditional survey process which the researcher are midsize firms with 20-99 employees, and the draws sample frame firms country and remaining percent are large firms (100 more then randomly selects firms from for what are employees) (Figure D.1). The largest samples are from typically phone interviews. The online survey method Guatemala and Salvador and from the financial scalable and considerably more cost-effective than services and food processing sectors (Figure D.2). phone computer-assisted telephone interview female chief executive officer (CEO) leads third (CATI). Prior attempts combinations CATIs the firms; women are also prevalent large male-led based sample frame and scalable online surveys firms’ management teams (Figure D.3 and Figure D.4). have resulted strikingly similar patterns firms’ The surveyed firms are located both the main urban performance between the two sets (when comparing centers and across provinces, including more rural firms the same size, sector, and geography). The areas (Figure D.5). method also allowed more easily reaching firms that were not their physical offices and their phones due COVID-19. There are some tradeoffs between online and traditional sampling methods. Online surveys inherently capture firms that are least extent digitized they can take the survey online and have self-selected take survey about the use technology (thus likely going knowing something about technology use). Hence, the sample, extent, over-represents firms that are more technology-intensive (and export-oriented, larger, and better performing). However, from experience, this does not markedly alter the general patterns firm performance and technology adoption from what they are CATI survey drawn from sampling frame. The survey used several measures ensure quality. The survey tracked the quality responses real-time, respondents took the survey, through embedded questions detecting the survey takers’ emotional state and through fingerprinting that combines Internet protocol (IP) address, device type, screen size, and cookies ensure only unique panelists enter the survey. maintains fraud score each respondent based historical completions (completion time percentage the stated length the survey any flagged poor completes) and bans those that breach certain level; the company also uses invisible ReCaptcha defend against bots. OVAT CEN Figure D.1. SURVEYED FIRMS, COUNTRY AND SIZE Costa Rica Salvador 118 106 107 Guatemala 160 119 120 109 Honduras Nicaragua Panama 129 100 200 300 400 500 600 Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Very large (+500 employees) Figure D.2. SURVEYED FIRMS, SECTOR AND SIZE Business process outsourcing (BPO) Financial services 105 High-tech manufacturing Light manufacturing Food processing 114 Livestock Agriculture (except livestock) 100 200 300 400 500 Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Very large (+500 employees) ECO DAT Figure D.3. Figure D.4. PERCENTAGE FIRMS, GENDER NUMBER FIRMS GENDER CEO AND SECTOR CEO AND GENDER DISTRIBUTION MANAGEMENT TEAM Business process Micro 29% 71% outsourcing (BPO) (1-4 employees) Female CEO Small Financial services 32% 68% (5-19 employees) Medium High-tech manufacturing 33% 67% (20-99 employees) Large (+100 employees) Light manufacturing 40% 60% Male CEO Micro Food processing 38% 62% (1-4 employees) 119 186 Small 144 Livestock 36% 64% (5-19 employees) Medium 106 222 (20-99 employees) Agriculture 28% 72% (except livestock) Large 129 142 (+100 employees) 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 100 200 300 400 Female CEO Male CEO women Executive team Executive team executive team 1-10% female 11-30% female Executive team Executive team Executive team 31-50% female 51-75% female >75% female Figure D.5. SURVEYED FIRMS PROVINCE/DEPARTMENT Number firms 299 OVAT CEN D.2 HOW FIRMS CENTRAL AMERICA USE TECHNOLOGIES THEIR OPERATIONS? Technology use highly correlated with firm size. Midsize and large firms are often better placed than micro and small firms cover the fixed costs technology adoption—including high-quality Internet, which enables the use other technologies—and acquire new staff capabilities use technologies. Significant majorities the micro and small firms use only the more basic technologies such mobile connections, social media, and video and messaging apps get online, interact with customers, and make decisions (Figure D.6). more substantial share—a quarter third, depending the technology—of midsize and large firms have already started use broadband, online stores and marketplaces, and specialized software manage their customer relationships and operations; some have even ventured use AI. Overall, the majority firms all sizes have yet use the more sophisticated technologies such AI, virtual reality, blockchain, even e-commerce. This suggests that there are Central America great opportunities for efficiency gains through the adoption technology. Figure D.6. ADOPTION TECHNOLOGIES CONNECT ONLINE, MAKE DECISIONS, MANAGE SALES AND MARKETING, AND ANALYZE CUSTOMERS, FIRM SIZE Connectivity Sales and Marketing 44% Social networks (Linkedin, Facebook, 67% LTE Mobile 41% Instagram, Twitter) 68% 35% Messaging/video call apps (Zoom, Skype, 45% Broadband 42% WhatsApp, Messenger) 51% 27% Ads (Google Ads, Facebook Ads, 26% Fiber optics YouTube Ads) 42% 40% 22% Other wired 21% Automated CRM 38% broadband 27% use the company 21% 11% own website 47% Satellite 14% Content apps 19% (e.g., YouTube, TikTok) 25% Mobile 14% use our online store 28% Mobile high-speed data access 14% 13% not use not use these technologies the internet External sales platforms (virtual malls, marketplaces) 16% Decision Making Customer Data Analytics Social media networks 68% Online conversation 62% 65% (WhatsApp chat, Internet chat) 61% 54% Cell phone 55% 47% Social networks 52% Messaging video 49% call apps 53% 47% Face-to-face meeting 47% 26% Television 34% Telephone surveys 25% 41% Meetings with other 25% business people 46% Structured online surveys 20% 36% Ads (Google Ads, Facebook 25% Ads, YouTube Ads) 38% Data analysis platforms 20% 37% Radio 20% (Google Analytics) 25% Content apps CRM other specialized 12% 19% software 30% (YouTube, TikTok) 24% Technical demonstrations 15% Technology based 19% public private agents 24% (chatbot) 22% Precision tools (sensors, 12% not use cameras, satellite images) 29% these methods 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% Micro and small (1-19 employees) Medium and large (20 and more employees) ECO DAT Larger firms have been earlier adopters various use one technology augment another. For example, sophisticated technologies. (See Figure D.7.) However, percent firms that use e-commerce marketplaces looking the data the adoption technologies also use some form AI, while only percent firms “digital journey” where small (and younger) firms that not use marketplaces use AI. gradually adopt new technologies they grow, However, size not the only differentiator firms’ appears that firms’ gateway technologies digital adoption technologies. widely shown payments and technologies leveraging digital data, multiple studies, more productive firms are also likelier followed gradually, firms grow, technologies participate trade—and continue innovating and such cybersecurity technologies, e-commerce, and adopting technologies compete international cloud computing services–followed further the markets. our survey, export-driven firms all size adoption AI, machine learning, blockchain, and virtual categories notably outperform their non-exporter reality. Firms that have adopted more sophisticated peers the adoption technologies (Figure D.8). technologies tend have bundles them and possibly Figure D.7. ADOPTION DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES, FIRM SIZE Micro (1-4 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Financial transactions 17% 36% 25% 13% Financial transactions 30% 19% 33% Technologies that use digital data 23% 35% 25% 11% Technologies that use digital data 38% 20% 23% Information systems 22% 37% 27% Information systems 37% 19% 22% E-commerce platforms 27% 36% 21% E-commerce platforms 14% 29% 15% 21% Video/audio tools for production 27% 35% 23% Video/audio tools for production 13% 36% 15% 19% Cloud computing 28% 34% 23% Cloud computing 35% 23% 18% Cyber security technologies 44% 29% 16% Cyber security technologies 35% 20% 18% Real-time market information 37% 30% 19% Real-time market information 36% 18% 17% Integrated management systems 44% 26% 20% Integrated management systems 10% 33% 20% 16% Precision instruments 41% 31% 18% Precision instruments 12% 30% 20% 15% Virtual reality 65% 17% 11%3%4% Virtual reality 46% 19% Machine learning 62% 21% 10%4% Machine learning 33% 25% 10% Artificial intelligence 67% 16% 11%2%4% Artificial intelligence 48% 17% 11% Blockchain 72% 15% 9%2%2% Blockchain 44% 19% 10% Small (5-19 employees) Large (+100 employees) Financial transactions 23% 33% 16% 23% Financial transactions 22% 19% 45% Technologies that use digital data 11% 25% 31% 15% 18% Technologies that use digital data 25% 23% 37% Information systems 26% 33% 16% 18% Information systems 26% 25% 31% E-commerce platforms 26% 23% 27% 10% 15% E-commerce platforms 25% 22% 31% Video/audio tools for production 14% 26% 31% 15% 14% Video/audio tools for production 25% 22% 30% Cloud computing 11% 29% 34% 12% 14% Cloud computing 13% 27% 16% 30% Cyber security technologies 15% 27% 33% 13% 13% Cyber security technologies 23% 24% 28% Real-time market information 19% 27% 25% 17% 13% Real-time market information 10% 27% 24% 27% Integrated management systems 23% 27% 28% 11% 12% Integrated management systems 27% 24% 27% Precision instruments 21% 24% 29% 14% 12% Precision instruments 16% 25% 22% 21% Virtual reality 45% 23% 17% Virtual reality 31% 19% 18% 14% Machine learning 53% 20% 13% Machine learning 42% 18% 12% 12% Artificial intelligence 53% 22% 12% Artificial intelligence 48% 15% 12% Blockchain 53% 18% 16% 7%6% Blockchain 39% 24% 14% 11% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% not use have used year have used 1-3 years have used 4-5 years have used years OVAT CEN Figure D.8. INTENSITY TECHNOLOGY USE, MICRO AND SMALL NON-EXPORTERS VS. EXPORTERS Financial transactions (payments, collections, others) 21% 37% 21% 12% Information systems 26% 36% 26% Micro (1-4 employees), Technologies that use digital data (e.g., optimize processes) 28% 34% 23% 10% Video/audio tools for production 33% 35% 20% non-exporter E-commerce platforms 34% 34% 19% Cloud computing 35% 34% 17% Real-time market information 43% 30% 16% Precision instruments (weight, temperature, humidity, others) 48% 28% 16% Integrated management systems 51% 28% 16% Cyber security technologies 51% 28% 13% Virtual reality 71% 16% 9%1% Machine learning 71% 17% Artificial Intelligence 78% 12% Blockchain 82% Financial transactions (payments, collections, others) 26% 34% 14% 19% Information systems 11% 28% 34% 10% 16% Small (5-19 employees), Technologies that use digital data (e.g., optimize processes) 16% 30% 30% 11% 12% Video/audio tools for production 17% 34% 31% 10% non-exporter E-commerce platforms 21% 32% 29% 11% Cloud computing 22% 32% 26% 10% 10% Real-time market information 29% 31% 20% 11% Precision instruments (weight, temperature, humidity, others) 31% 29% 24% Integrated management systems 34% 27% 24% Cyber security technologies 35% 24% 25% Virtual reality 57% 22% 12% Machine learning 63% 21% 10% Artificial Intelligence 66% 18% 6%2% Blockchain 69% 10% Financial transactions (payments, collections, others) 33% 30% 10% 13% Information systems 12% 40% 25% 10% Micro (1-4 employees), Technologies that use digital data (e.g., optimize processes) 12% 37% 28% Video/audio tools for production 13% 31% 32% 11% E-commerce platforms 13% 34% 29% 10% exporter Cloud computing 13% 33% 28% 10% Real-time market information 22% 30% 24% Precision instruments (weight, temperature, humidity, others) 25% 34% 23% Integrated management systems 28% 28% 22% 11% Cyber security technologies 28% 27% 26% Virtual reality 41% 28% 13% Machine learning 42% 23% 18% Artificial Intelligence 47% 25% 13% Blockchain 49% 20% 15% Financial transactions (payments, collections, others) 18% 27% 15% 23% Information systems 20% 27% 18% 17% Small (5-19 employees), Technologies that use digital data (e.g., optimize processes) 22% 33% 12% 15% Video/audio tools for production 18% 28% 15% 20% E-commerce platforms 18% 30% 16% 15% Cloud computing 19% 31% 12% 16% exporter Real-time market information 20% 25% 19% 15% Precision instruments (weight, temperature, humidity, others) 12% 17% 29% 15% 13% Integrated management systems 12% 23% 27% 13% 13% Cyber security technologies 15% 19% 25% 13% 15% Virtual reality 30% 21% 18% Machine learning 35% 15% 21% Artificial Intelligence 36% 18% 15% 10% Blockchain 38% 20% 13% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% not use have used year have used 1-3 years have used 4-5 years have used years ECO DAT There are also some variations across sectors both the use technologies and engagement trade. higher share firms services sectors—BPO and financial services—use technologies than firms the more traditional export sectors like agriculture and light manufacturing (Table D.1). Firms services sectors also perceive themselves using technologies more intensively; for example, midsize and large BPO and financial services firms rate the intensity their technology use above points point scale such areas human resources, quality control, and sales and marketing, while midsize and large agricultural firms rate their technology use 7.5 points out 10. Smaller firms rate their technology use lower, especially production inventory management activities (Figure D.9 and Figure D.10). Comparable male- and female-led firms, however, have strikingly similar technology adoption rates and sequences (Figure D.11). Table D.1. PERCENTAGE FIRMS USING VARIOUS TECHNOLOGIES FOR LEAST ONE YEAR AND EXPORTING AND IMPORTING SECTOR (HIGHEST USAGE RATES HIGHLIGHTED) Business Agriculture Livestock process (except (cattle, pigs, Food Light High-tech Financial outsourcing livestock) poultry) processing manufaturing manufacturing services (BPO) Technologies that use digital data 56% 57% 65% 53% 53% 74% 78% Information systems 56% 58% 66% 59% 77% 76% Precision instruments 49% 58% 64% 47% 47% 45% 47% Cloud computing 51% 52% 57% 53% 53% 70% 75% E-commerce platforms 52% 54% 55% 49% 49% 67% 68% Financial transactions 59% 65% 70% 64% 64% 80% 78% Real-time market 54% 57% 53% 47% 47% 65% 62% information Integrated management 52% 51% 55% 44% 44% 62% 68% systems Video/audio tools for production 54% 55% 63% 51% 51% 64% 74% Virtual reality 31% 32% 29% 23% 23% 30% 29% Artificial intelligence 34% 35% 29% 21% 21% 32% 32% Blockchain 29% 28% 32% 21% 21% 30% 28% Machine learning 31% 34% 34% 25% 25% 40% 37% Cyber security technologies 43% 44% 52% 40% 40$ 64% 67% Export 60% 60% 58% 50% 68% 51% 55% Import (to add value, not 46% 64% 56% 62% 68% 56% 44% re-sell) OVAT CEN Figure D.9. INTENSITY TECHNOLOGY USE BUSINESS OPERATIONS AMONG MICRO AND SMALL FIRMS, SECTOR (1=LOW; 10=HIGH) Micro and Small (1-19 employees) Purchases Production Inventory management Creative processes and design Packaging Logistics, distribution and delivery Marketing and publicity Sales After-sales Quality control Human resources Agriculture (except livestock) High-tech manufacturing Livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry) Financial services Processed foods Business process outsourcing (BPO) Light manufacturing Figure D.10. INTENSITY TECHNOLOGY USE BUSINESS OPERATIONS, MIDSIZE AND LARGE FIRMS, SECTOR (1=LOW; 10=HIGH) Medium and large (20 more employees) Purchases Production Inventory management Creative processes and design Packaging Logistics, distribution and delivery Marketing and publicity Sales After-sales Quality control Human resources Agriculture (except livestock) High-tech manufacturing Livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry) Financial services Processed foods Business process outsourcing (BPO) Light manufacturing ECO DAT Figure D.11. ADOPTION DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES MICRO AND SMALL FIRMS, GENDER CEO Financial transactions 17% 35% 24% 14% Technologies that use digital data 22% 38% 24% 10% Information systems 22% 38% 25% 10% Micro (1-4 employees) Video/audio tools for production 27% 36% 19% E-commerce platforms 28% 36% 20% 10% Male CEO Cloud computing 31% 32% 21% Real-time market information 38% 29% 18% Precision instruments 38% 33% 18% Integrated management systems 45% 24% 19% Cyber security technologies 46% 26% 17% Machine learning 67% 17% Virtual reality 68% 14% 10% Artificial intelligence 69% 13% 12% 2%4% Blockchain 74% 13% 2%3% Financial transactions 23% 31% 18% 22% Information systems 27% 30% 15% 19% Technologies that use digital data 11% 25% 32% 14% 18% Small (5-19 employees) Cloud computing 11% 29% 35% 11% 14% Video/audio tools for production 14% 28% 33% 12% 13% E-commerce platforms 15% 26% 29% 16% 14% Male CEO Real-time market information 20% 26% 25% 17% 13% Precision instruments 22% 29% 27% 11% 11% Integrated management systems 23% 22% 29% 13% 12% Cyber security technologies 27% 21% 28% 15% Machine learning 45% 22% 18% Blockchain 52% 22% 14% Virtual reality 54% 18% 14% Artificial intelligence 56% 15% 16% Financial transactions 16% 39% 27% 11% Technologies that use digital data 18% 37% 33% Information systems 22% 38% 27% Micro (1-4 employees) Video/audio tools for production 23% 31% 29% E-commerce platforms 25% 32% 33% Female CEO Cloud computing 25% 39% 26% Real-time market information 32% 34% 23% Precision instruments 41% 33% 16% Integrated management systems 42% 31% 20% 4%3% Cyber security technologies 45% 27% 20% Machine learning 56% 27% Artificial intelligence 60% 24% 12% 1%3% Virtual reality 67% 17% 10% 3%3% Blockchain 68% 18% 13% 3%1% Financial transactions 22% 34% 13% 24% Information systems 23% 36% 16% 18% Cloud computing 31% 32% 11% 14% Small (5-19 employees) 11% Technologies that use digital data 11% 26% 30% 14% 18% Video/audio tools for production 14% 25% 34% 11% 15% Female CEO E-commerce platforms 16% 25% 32% 11% 15% Real-time market information 18% 27% 31% 13% 11% Cyber security technologies 19% 28% 24% 16% 13% Integrated management systems 22% 25% 26% 12% 15% Precision instruments 24% 23% 30% 15% Machine learning 43% 27% 16% Artificial intelligence 52% 22% 15% Virtual reality 53% 21% 12% 10% Blockchain 55% 22% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% not use have used year have used 1-3 years have used 4-5 years have used years OVAT CEN Asked about the reasons adopt technologies, the surveyed firms cited the need compete harder with domestic and international peers, access new markets, and develop new products. Firms also adopt new technologies replace their legacy technologies (Figure D.12 and Figure D.13). Figure D.12. REASONS FOR TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION AMONG MICRO AND SMALL FIRMS, COUNTRY 39% 47% Access new markets 42% 53% 49% 49% 48% 41% 47% Replace equipment 47% 29% 46% 34% 42% 41% Domestic competition 41% 33% 42% 35% 37% 29% International competition 33% 38% 32% 39% 29% 41% Produce new products 31% 44% 38% 19% 17% 15% Produce same products more efficiently 21% 22% 19% 26% 20% Adopt technology from other companies 21% 19% our sector 16% 23% 16% 20% 19% Adopt technology from other companies 18% 20% our region 22% 17% 16% 15% Comply with regulations and standards 10% 13% 17% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% Costa Rica Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama ECO DAT Figure D.13. REASONS FOR TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION AMONG MIDSIZE AND LARGE FIRMS, COUNTRY 50% 46% Replace equipment 54% 54% 51% 57% 51% 49% 50% International competition 53% 51% 49% 50% 53% 46% Acess new markets 49% 52% 48% 44% 43% 37% Produce new products 46% 34% 47% 39% 34% 31% Domestic competition 38% 32% 37% 29% 33% 27% Adopt technology from other 25% 29% companies our sector 32% 30% 25% Produce same products 22% 24% more efficiently 27% 33% 23% 27% 23% Comply with regulations 20% 31% and standards 25% 21% 18% 20% Adopt technology from other 16% companies the area 25% 27% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% Costa Rica Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama OVAT CEN Promoting firms’ technology adoption has important payoffs. The most technology-intensive firms report particularly large gains from technology use, especially terms new customers and increased productivity (Figure D.14). Figure D.14. GAINS FROM THE ADOPTION TECHNOLOGIES, FIRM SIZE AND DIGITAL INTENSITY MATURE DIGITIZERS (TOP-50 PERCENTILE INTENSITY USING TECHNOLOGIES) Micro (1-4 employees) Growth sales 31% 34% 26% New markets 35% 28% 24% New customers 39% 32% 21% Improved human capital 35% 35% 17% Reduction costs 28% 33% 26% Increase productivity 35% 29% 22% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Small (1-19 employees) Growth sales 35% 46% 15% New markets 31% 38% 26% New customers 44% 39% 15% Improved human capital 36% 41% 18% Reduction costs 26% 36% 32% Increase productivity 43% 40% 13% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Medium (20-99 employees) Growth sales 43% 42% 11% New markets 33% 42% 19% New customers 47% 35% 14% Improved human capital 36% 42% 16% Reduction costs 27% 32% 33% Increase productivity 44% 39% 13% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Large (+100 employees) Growth sales 47% 36% 13% New markets 45% 31% 19% New customers 51% 33% 12% Improved human capital 46% 37% 15% Reduction costs 38% 35% 23% Increase productivity 55% 34% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% great deal Quite lot Somewhat Not all ECO DAT EMERGING DIGITIZERS (BOTTOM-50 PERCENTILE INTENSITY USING TECHNOLOGIES) Micro (1-4 employees) Growth sales 29% 36% 27% New markets 29% 29% 34% New customers 30% 36% 20% Improved human capital 24% 33% 29% Reduction costs 23% 32% 33% Increase productivity 31% 34% 26% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Small (1-19 employees) Growth sales 21% 42% 32% New markets 18% 35% 40% New customers 26% 37% 30% Improved human capital 26% 42% 26% Reduction costs 12% 43% 38% Increase productivity 31% 42% 21% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Medium (20-99 employees) Growth sales 23% 42% 25% New markets 21% 29% 34% 13% New customers 34% 37% 19% Improved human capital 20% 43% 26% 11% Reduction costs 13% 45% 37% Increase productivity 29% 39% 27% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Large (+100 employees) Growth sales 19% 47% 27% New markets 24% 45% 24% New customers 33% 33% 29% Improved human capital 29% 44% 19% Reduction costs 11% 41% 39% Increase productivity 36% 46% 15% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% great deal Quite lot Somewhat Not all OVAT CEN D.3 CHALLENGES FACED FIRMS USE TECHNOLOGY Robust digital capabilities and the use online sales channels may help firms export and grow. However, many firms Central America are still not using technologies intensively their operations. This not due lack interest understanding that technologies matter. Asked about the technologies that will transform their industries the next decade, firms across sectors highlighted e-commerce, financial technologies, automation, and robotics (Figure D.15). However, the surveyed firms also cited lack knowledge about the various available technologies, concerns about the return investment technologies, and financing gaps obstacles the adoption new technologies (Figure D.16). This may point the need for public-private partnerships enable firms learn about and test technologies. far, firms across the region have received technical assistance apply technologies, especially from technology providers and associations (Figure D.17 and Figure D.18). Firms across size categories and countries call for more training about technologies and support for identifying the right technologies (Figure D.19 and Figure D.20). Figure D.15. NUMBER FIRMS SEEING TECHNOLOGY MOST IMPACTFUL TECHNOLOGY THEIR SECTOR THE NEXT DECADE, SECTOR Business process outsourcing (BPO) Financial services 184 104 High-tech manufacturing 169 Light manufacturing Processed food 172 Livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry) Agriculture (except livestock) 106 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% E-commerce Financial technologies Automation Robotics Machine learning Artificial intelligence Blockchain Internet Things Cloud edge computing Cybersecurity ECO DAT Figure D.16. PERCENTAGE FIRMS MENTIONING OBSTACLE ADOPTING NEW EQUIPMENT, MACHINERY, SOFTWARE, DIGITIZING PROCESSES, FIRM SIZE 26% 23% Acquisition cost 22% 18% 19% Lack information avaliable 17% equipment and technology 16% 16% 12% Difficulty obtaining financing 10% 10% Uncertainty demand Lack conviction about the cost/benefit 10% 11% Lack technical skills required operate the equipment 10% Consumer preferences not value product quality Lack access providers accompany the process Access maintenance and after-sales service Lack availability technologies Regulations Limited services such electricity, Internet connection water 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) OVAT CEN Figure D.17. SOURCES FOR TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE APPLY TECHNOLOGY, MICRO AND SMALL FIRMS 58% 51% 56% Technology providers 50% 50% 41% 32% 31% Clients buyers 39% 37% 32% 40% 36% Business associations 34% 35% 15% 21% 20% Academic centers 22% 24% 16% 21% Government 13% 14% 17% 16% 16% have not received technical 16% assistance 12% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% Costa Rica Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama Figure D.18. SOURCES FOR TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE APPLY TECHNOLOGY, MEDIUM AND LARGE FIRMS 67% 67% 69% Technology providers 68% 61% 41% 49% 44% Clients buyers 40% 47% 45% 35% 35% 34% Business associations 34% 27% 40% 20% 20% 12% Academic centers 23% 22% 26% 26% 24% Government 20% 19% 20% 22% have not received technical assistance 10% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% Costa Rica Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama ECO DAT Figure D.19. SUPPORT NEEDED ADOPT TECHNOLOGIES, MICRO AND SMALL FIRMS 48% 42% Training education 50% 49% 55% 49% 47% 42% Search for technology 33% 43% 38% 36% 31% 28% Technical support 29% 30% 31% 24% 24% 20% 16% Physical infrastructure 28% 27% 22% 24% 24% 28% System licenses 27% 22% 23% 21% 26% 29% Equipment 26% 24% 26% 21% 26% Technical certification for standards 22% 19% compliance 25% 21% 15% 18% Market access (costumer search, trade 16% fairs, business directories) 13% 13% 15% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% Costa Rica Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama OVAT CEN Figure D.20. SUPPORT NEEDED ADOPT TECHNOLOGIES, MEDIUM AND LARGE FIRMS 43% 52% Training education 55% 47% 46% 46% 38% 35% Search for technology 35% 44% 42% 36% 34% 37% Technical support 32% 34% 28% 28% 30% 28% 25% Physical infrastructure 33% 30% 27% 26% 26% 26% System licenses 28% 31% 29% 25% 30% 28% Equipment 23% 23% 30% 19% 18% Technical certification for standards 17% 17% compliance 17% 20% 17% 15% Market access (costumer search, trade 20% fairs, business directories) 14% 19% 19% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% Costa Rica Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama ECO DAT Another challenge technology adoption access talent. Central American firms are hiring in-house technical capabilities leverage and build new technologies, such engineers and programmers (Figure D.21). However, especially micro and small firms struggle pay wages commanded skilled applicants, while larger firms cite workforce skills gaps leading challenge hire talent (Figure D.22). Figure D.21. HUMAN RESOURCES USED ADOPT AND USE TECHNOLOGY, FIRM SIZE 28% 22% Micro (1-4 employees) 13% 27% 28% 12% Small (5-19 employees) 12% 28% 23% 13% Medium (20-99 employees) 16% 35% 22% Large (100-499 employees) 17% 10% 20% 30% 40% In-house programmers In-house technicians Individual external national consultants In-house engineers Individual external international consultants International supplier firms National supplier firms Figure D.22. MAIN CHALLENGES HIRE TALENT, FIRM SIZE 36% 19% Micro (1-4 employees) 18% 19% 28% 29% Small (5-19 employees) 24% 13% 24% Medium (20-99 employees) 36% 23% 13% 27% 33% Large (100-499 employees) 19% 15% 10% 20% 30% 40% Applicants demand very high wages Lack highly trained professionals the country Lack professionals the county challenges reported OVAT CEN Many firms across sectors see e-commerce from customers when using marketplaces and are transformative technology their respective concerned about the costs developing talent sectors. They cite number benefits from manage marketplaces. marketplaces their businesses, such greater These challenges could, part, alleviated. access customers, lower marketing costs, Doing would require capacity building and executive and more fluid access payment and logistics education-type programs for firms’ leadership teams; services (Figure D.23). However, firms also cite high channel management platforms that enable firms commissions charged marketplaces and limited easily manage their online channels; and, over time, interoperability across marketplaces limiting new digital identities that enable firms more easily gains (Figure D.24). Large firms also feel disconnected authenticated across marketplaces and online services. Figure D.23. MAIN GAINS FROM THE USE MARKETPLACES, FIRM SIZE 61% 58% Facilitate access customers 64% 62% 43% 46% Reduced marketing costs 44% 48% 35% 32% Avert high technology investments 42% 39% 34% 35% Build credibility with customers 40% 39% 33% Use complementary services 32% (payments, delivery) 34% 39% 33% 32% Ease set online store 36% 36% 23% 32% Fuel competition 27% 30% 18% Ease paying taxes 21% 25% 24% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) 100 ECO DAT Figure D.24. MAIN BARRIERS USE MARKETPLACES, FIRM SIZE 32% High commissions 34% 32% 32% 30% Reputation not transferrable 36% other marketplaces 34% 36% 28% Limited interaction with potential 27% customers 32% 32% 25% Reputation management 20% too complex 27% 24% 19% 22% Employee training costs 27% 29% 17% 19% Late payments from marketplace 24% 24% 16% 18% Strict claims processes 21% 27% 15% High share rejected payments 21% 24% 25% 11% 13% New taxes 18% 15% 10% Limited competition 15% 18% 14% 10% 20% 30% 40% Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) OVAT CEN the COVID-19 crisis has caused consumers migrate online, there have been significant new opportunities for regional firms that are e-commerce-ready grow their sales. However, while most firms have intensified their use e-commerce (Figure D.25), the crisis has also surfaced gaps economies’ e-commerce readiness, such long delivery times and supply and capacity constraints (Figure D.26). Figure D.25. PERCENTAGE FIRMS THAT HAVE INCREASED ONLINE SALES DUE COVID, SIZE Micr0 (1-4 employees) 65% Small (5-19 employees) 66% Medium (20-99 employees) 68% Large (+100 employees) 78% 55% 60% 65% 70% 75% 80% 102 ECO DAT Figure D.26. PERCENTAGE FIRMS THAT REPORT CHALLENGES SELLING ONLINE DURING COVID, SIZE 53% 49% Increased delivery times 52% 55% 27% Lack reliable suppliers 29% 29% 28% 26% Order volume has exceeded capacity 31% 33% 35% 22% Poorer customer service 23% 24% 24% 20% 20% Increase online fraud 24% 28% 18% 18% Increase cybersecurity and 22% fraud risks 27% 17% 22% Increase customer disputes 21% 24% 16% Increased costs for the client 20% 21% 19% 15% 13% Reduced customer confidence 13% 14% 11% Failed payments 10% 15% 14% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) OVAT CEN 103 Payments are another opportunity and challenge for regional firms gain new efficiencies and interact with customers. Especially online seller-exporters are embracing digital payments such cards and e-wallets (Figure D.27) and have, extent, overcome their less digitized peers’ concerns about payment fraud. Less digitized sellers that not yet have online stores presence marketplaces worry about the security e-wallets and mobile payments, suggesting need for greater awareness-building for firms about digital transactions (Figure D.28). Figure D.27. PAYMENTS ACCEPTANCE METHODS, USE ONLINE CHANNELS 90% 80% 82% 70% 73% 73% 69% 60% 63% 61% 60% 60% 58% 50% 55% 53% 51% 50% 48% 40% 45% 43% 30% 36% 34% 30% 26% 20% 18% 16% 10% 15% 10% lin lin ffl ffl lle cia cia lle lle lle Cash Cheque Bank wire Debit and credit cards E-wallet and mobile payments Other payments such codes Bitcoins and virtual currencies Figure D.28. PERCENTAGE FIRMS CONCERNED WITH FRAUD, ONLINE VS. OFFLINE SELLERS 45% 40% 42% 35% 30% 34% 34% 34% 32% 32% 25% 29% 27% 20% 24% 24% 24% 22% 22% 22% 15% 10% lle lle offl Cash Cheque Bank wire Debit and credit cards E-wallet and mobile payments Other payments such codes Bitcoins and virtual currencies ECO DAT D.4 SUMMARY STATISTICS Country Sector Size Number firms Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Agriculture (except livestock) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Business process outsourcing (BPO) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Costa Rica Small (5-19 employees) Financial services Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Food processing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) High-tech manufacturing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Light manufacturing Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Agriculture (except livestock) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Business process outsourcing (BPO) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Financial services Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Salvador Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Food processing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) High-tech manufacturing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Light manufacturing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Agriculture (except livestock) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Business process outsourcing (BPO) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Financial services Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Guatemala Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Food processing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) High-tech manufacturing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Light manufacturing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) OVAT CEN 105 D.4 SUMMARY STATISTICS Country Sector Size Number firms Micro (1-4 employees) Agriculture (except livestock) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Business process outsourcing (BPO) Medium (20-99 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Financial services Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Honduras Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Food processing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) High-tech manufacturing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Light manufacturing Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Agriculture (except livestock) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Business process outsourcing (BPO) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Financial services Nicaragua Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Food processing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) High-tech manufacturing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Light manufacturing Small (5-19 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Agriculture (except livestock) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Business process outsourcing (BPO) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Financial services Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Panama Small (5-19 employees) Food processing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) High-tech manufacturing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Light manufacturing Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) 106 ECO DAT ANNEX SURVEY DIGITAL SERVICE PROVIDERS E.1 SAMPLE survey drawn from sampling frame. This survey leveraged online survey methods The survey used several measures ensure quality. and online survey firm proprietary panel The survey tracked the quality responses real-time, respondents. The online survey process differs from respondents took the survey, through embedded traditional survey process which the researcher questions detecting the survey takers’ emotional draws sample frame firms country and state and through fingerprinting that combines then randomly selects firms from for what are address, device type, screen size, and cookies ensure typically phone interviews. The online survey method only unique panelists enter the survey. maintains scalable and considerably more cost-effective fraud score each respondent based historical than phone interview CATI. Prior attempts completions (completion time percentage combinations CATIs based sample frame and the stated length the survey any flagged poor scalable online surveys have resulted strikingly similar completes) and bans those that breach certain level; patterns firms’ performance between the two sets the company also uses invisible ReCaptcha defend (when comparing firms the same size, sector, and against bots. geography). The method also allowed more easily The survey was performed October 2020–17 reaching firms that were not their physical offices January 2021, and the sample consists 209 firms, and their phones due COVID-19. total 291 that started the survey. Thirty-seven There are some tradeoffs between online and percent are microenterprises with 1–4 employees, traditional sampling methods. Online surveys percent are small firms with 5–19 employees, percent inherently capture firms that are least extent are midsize firms with 20–99 employees, and the digitized they can take the survey online and remaining percent are large firms with more than have self-selected take survey about the use 100 employees but fewer than 499 employees (Figure technology (thus likely going knowing something E.1). The largest samples are from Guatemala and about technology use). Hence, the sample, extent, Salvador; the firms represent wide range target over-represents firms that are more technology- sectors (Figure E.2). third are led female CEO; intensive (and export-oriented, larger, and better however, women are also prevalent large male-led performing). However, from experience, this does not firms’ management teams (Figure E.3 and Figure E.4). markedly alter the general patterns firm performance The surveyed firms are located both the main urban and technology adoption from what they are CATI centers and across provinces (Figure E.5). Figure E.1. SURVEYED FIRMS, COUNTRY AND SIZE Costa Rica Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) OVAT CEN 107 Figure E.2. SURVEYED FIRMS ALL SECTORS SELECTED AND SIZE Connectibity and connection systems Digital tools for measurement and process control Video and audio Digital marketing Computer controlled machinery Data storage Digitalization processes Cloud computing Digital technology for prototyping Development and design web pages Automation Development mobile applications ERP systems Fintech printing Robotics Big data Machine learning Blockchain Layout 100 Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Figure E.3. PERCENTAGE FIRMS GENDER CEO AND SECTOR Robotics 42% 42% 58% 58% Video and audio 42% 58% Digital marketing 41% 59% Development and design web pages 40% 60% Computer controlled machinery 39% 61% Data storage 37% 63% ERP systems 36% 64% Digital tools for measurement and process control 35% 65% Development mobile applications 33% 67% Cloud computing 32% 68% Digital technology for prototyping 31% 69% Connectivity and connection systems 30% 70% printing 30% 70% Layout 29% 71% Digitalization processes 28% 72% Machine learning 25% 75% Automation 23% 77% Fintech 21% 79% Blockchain 20% 80% Big data 15% 85% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Female CEO Male CEO 108 ECO DAT Figure E.4. SURVEYED FIRMS GENDER CEO AND GENDER DISTRIBUTION MANAGEMENT TEAM Micro (1-4 employees) Female CEO Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (+100 employees) Male CEO Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (+100 employees) women executive team Executive team 1-10% female Executive team 11-30% female Executive team 31-50% female Executive team 51-79% female Executive team >75% female Figure E.5. SURVEYED FIRMS PROVINCE/DEPARTMENT Number firms 299 OVAT CEN E.2. HOW DIGITAL SERVICE PROVIDERS ACCESS AND USE TECHNOLOGIES? Significant shares digital services firms all size categories are using broadband connect online. Larger firms also use fiberoptics and dial-up and satellite connections (Figure E.6). Firms, general, report steady connections; few have experienced frequent service interruptions (Figure E.7). Figure E.6. PERCENTAGE FIRMS MAIN WAYS CONNECT THE INTERNET, FIRM SIZE 43% 54% Broadband 32% 50% 31% 37% Mobile LTE 38% 28% 29% Optical fiber 24% 42% 56% 25% 24% Other wired broadband 46% 36% Mobile high-speed data access 14% 13% Satellite 18% 19% Mobile 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Figure E.7. PERCENTAGE FIRMS EXPERIENCING SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS 2019 100% 90% 13% 14% 17% 80% 70% 39% 54% 54% 60% 38% 50% 40% 30% 50% 20% 39% 28% 26% 10% Micro Small Medium Large (1-4 employees) (5-19 employees) (20-99 employees) (+100 employees) Never Once month 1-2 times per month 3-5 times per month 5-10 times per month ECO DAT Asked about the main source technologies they use, over quarter reported leveraging open source technologies. However, fifth, larger firms particular, also use global services and their own developments (Figure E.8). Most firms across size categories learn about technologies from national technology suppliers; large firms also consult international suppliers and public programs (Figure E.9). penetrate international markets, export-driven firms have used export promotion agencies and business associations for advice; non-exporters have mostly not received (or sought) assistance (Figure E.10). Figure E.8. PERCENTAGE FIRMS USING TECHNOLOGY, FIRM SIZE 28% 33% Open source technologies 22% 24% 23% 17% Own developments 23% 14% Global digital services and 22% platforms (e.g., Google, 19% 20% Shopify, AWS) 17% Combination own 14% developments with open 13% source technologies 17% International vendor 10% development license 11% 16% National vendor 12% 12% development license 11% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Figure E.9. NUMBER FIRMS STATING THEY HAVE USED SOURCE FOR TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE SERVICES, FIRM SIZE Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (+100 employees) 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% National suppliers Global suppliers Technology park Private program Public program OVAT CEN 111 Figure E.10. PERCENTAGE FIRMS USING SOURCE FOR EXPORT ASSISTANCE, FIRM SIZE AND EXPORT PARTICIPATION 19% 32% Micro and small 36% (1-19 employees) 13% Exporter 21% Medium and large 26% (over employees) 47% 22% Non-exporter 91% Micro and small (1-19 employees) 69% Medium and large 10% (over employees) 14% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% have not received assistance National export promotion agency Private business association Business development program Technology park Most firms fund themselves and their technology adoptions with personal funds and bank loans. Some larger firms have been able avail themselves venture capital well (Figure E.11). There are few differences between firms run female CEO opposed male CEOs the use these sources. Figure E.11. PERCENTAGE FIRMS STATING THEY HAVE USED SOURCE FINANCING, FIRM SIZE 74% 42% 30% Micro (1-4 employees) 52% Small (5-19 employees) 20% 13% 15% 70% 44% 32% Medium (20-99 employees) 22% 32% 77% 47% Large (+100 employees) 17% 17% 33% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% Personal funds Bank loans Family members Seed Capital Venture Capital Donations ECO DAT E.3. MAIN CHALLENGES THE PROVISION DIGITAL SERVICES Firms see business registration processes, taxes, and concerns around intellectual property protections and cybersecurity the main challenges for the use digital services their countries. (See Figure E.12.) They perceive high competition and limited scale markets constraints efforts scale and expand new markets (Figure E.13). Firms also face challenges recruiting talent due perceived workforce skills gaps (Figure E.14) and anticipate stiffer competition amid limited demand 2021 (Figure E.15). Figure E.12. PERCENTAGE MICRO AND SMALL FIRMS CITING BARRIERS DIGITAL SERVICES THEIR COUNTRY 52% 30% 31% Fiscal regulations 33% 34% 22% 46% 46% 36% Cybersecurity risks 39% 41% 40% 46% 45% 47% Business registration requirements 44% 52% 34% 29% 23% Rules Internet providers 24% 25% (e.g., licensing requirements) 24% 28% 27% 36% 34% Intellectual property protection 36% 28% 32% 25% 27% 24% Data privacy rules 14% 25% 28% 23% 23% 25% 19% Copyright issues 28% 35% 20% 16% 14% Data hosting rules 14% 17% 25% 20% 23% 24% Consumer protection legislation 22% 14% 32% 20% Lack limitations legal liabilities 32% 39% digital suppliers (“safe harbor”) 21% 25% 37% 18% 13% 19% Censorship rules 17% 24% 16% 11% Business shutdown, bankruptcy and 10% insolvency requirements 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% Costa Rica Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama OVAT CEN Figure E.13. PERCENTAGE SURVEYED FIRMS CITING BARRIERS EXPANDING NEW MARKETS, COUNTRY 64% 64% 61% Lack information about 53% potential customers 59% 54% 45% 32% Potential customers are unwilling 29% 36% pay for services 38% 43% 41% 25% Potential customers’ lack 39% 28% connectivity 24% 37% 38% 43% Lack potential customers’ digital 39% 39% maturity 41% 37% 32% 34% 37% Limited size the target market 33% 24% 28% 32% 39% Potential customers’ lack trust 34% 31% digital processes 28% 40% 23% 23% 25% Lack knowledge international markets 19% 28% 35% 20% 16% Potential customers’ lack willingness 14% 14% contract services 17% 25% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% Costa Rica Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama ECO DAT Figure E.14. MAIN CHALLENGES HIRE TALENT, FIRM SIZE 51% 35% 31% Micro (1-4 employees) 29% 29% 21% 46% 39% Small (5-19 employees) 28% 41% 35% 46% 42% 28% Medium (20-99 employees) 42% 34% 22% 58% 47% Large (+100 employees) 28% 50% 36% 28% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% Low quality local training and education programs Low level specialization High cost fees and salaries for qualified personnel Few locally qualified technicians and professionals Low level soft skills (compliance, commitment, etc.) High demand for qualified personnel Figure E.15. ANTICIPATED MAIN CONSTRAINTS SALES GROWTH 2021, FIRM SIZE 22% 22% Strong competition 18% 17% 20% 15% Low local market demand 17% 10% 14% Limited customer capacity pay 11% 17% 16% 11% Availability new 11% technologies the country 11% Lack trained human resources 10% 13% Regulations and taxes 15% 11% 15% Limited customer connectivity 10% Lack working capital 10% Lack specialized human resources 10% 15% 20% 25% Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) OVAT CEN E.4. SUMMARY STATISTICS measurement and Digital tools for process control and connection technology for Digitalization Connectivity ERP systems proceeses prototyping Automation printing machinery controlled Computer Financial systems All firms Country services Digital Size Micro (1-4 employees) Costa Rica Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Salvador Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Guatemala Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Honduras Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Nicaragua Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Panama Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) ECO DAT (cloud computing) Digital marketing Cloud technology Machine learning Video and audio Data storage Mobile apps Web design Blockchain All firms Robotics Big data Country Layout Size Micro (1-4 employees) Costa Rica Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Salvador Small (5-19 employees) Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Guatemala Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Honduras Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Nicaragua Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) Micro (1-4 employees) Small (5-19 employees) Panama Medium (20-99 employees) Large (100-499 employees) OVAT CEN BIBLIOGRAPHY Estrategia Negocios. 2019. “Hugo App Atrae Audretsch, David, Marcio Cruz, and Jesica Torres. Inversionistas Relacionados con Skype, Spotify, 2020. “Entrepreneurship Ecosystems Developing Pipedrive Taxify [Hugo App Attracts Investors related Countries.” Manuscript. Skype, Spotify, Pipedrive and Taxify],” February Barefoot, Kevin, Dave Curtis, William Jolliff, Jessica 2019. https://www.estrategiaynegocios.net/ Nicholson, and Robert Omohundro. 2018. “Defining empresasymanagement/1255374-330/hugo-app-atrae- and Measuring the Digital Economy.” Washington, DC: a-inversionistas-relacionados-con-skype-spotify- Department Commerce Bureau Economic pipedrive-y-taxify Analysis. https://www.bea.gov/system/files/papers/ Felkner, John S., and Robert Townsend. 2011. “The WP2018-4.pdf Geographic Concentration Enterprise Developing CENPROMYPE/SICA. 2014. Regional Strategy Promote Countries.” The Quarterly Journal Economics 126 (4): Entrepreneurship. https://www.sica.int/documentos/ 2005–61. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjr046 estrategia-sica-emprende_1_84048.html GALI (Global Accelerator Learning Initiative). 2021. CENPROMYPE/SICA. 2020. Opportunities, Challenges “Acceleration and Access Finance Central and Gaps for the Development and Use E-Commerce America. Knowledge Brief the Global Accelerator MSMEs Central America. Learning Initiative". April. https://www.galidata.org/ assets/report/pdf/Knowledge%20Brief_Central%20 Cirera, Xavier, Diego Comin, and Marcio Cruz. America_EN.pdf 2020. New Approach Measure Technology Adoption: The Firm Adoption Technologies (FAT) GALI (Global Accelerator Learning Initiative), and Survey.” World Bank. Citibanamex. 2019. “Acceleration Central America: Initial Data from the Global Accelerator Learning Cirera, Xavier, Diego Comin, Marcio Cruz, and Kyung Initiative.” https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.andeglobal. Min Lee. 2020. “Technology Within and Across Firms.” org/resource/resmgr/research_library/centralamerica_ NBER Working Papers 28080, National Bureau datasummary_e.pdf Economic Research, Inc. GEM (Global Entrepreneurship Monitor). Cruz, Marcio and Jesica Torres. 2020. “Local 2020. 2019/2020 Global Report. London: Global Entrepreneurship Ecosystems Central America: Entrepreneurship Research Association. https://www. Challenges and Opportunities Digital Technologies.” gemconsortium.org/report/gem-2019-2020-global- Manuscript. report. Cruz, Marcio, Jesica Torres, and Trang Tran. 2020. Google and IFC (International Finance Corporation). “Entrepreneurship Ecosystems Senegal: Challenges 2020. “e-Conomy Africa 2020. Africa $180 billion and Opportunities Digital Technologies.” Manuscript. Internet economy future.” https://www.ifc.org/ wps/wcm/connect/publications_ext_content/ifc_ Dinh, Hinh 2014. ight Manufacturing Vietnam: external_publication_site/publications_listing_page/ Creating Jobs and Prosperity Middle-Income google-e-conomy Economy. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://doi. org/10.1596/978-1-4648-0034-4 ITU. 2020. World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2020. 24th Edition. December 2020. Dinh, Hinh T., Vincent Palmade, Vandana Chandra, and Frances Cossar. 2012. Light Manufacturing Africa: Khanna, Mahima, Sebastian Sarmiento-Saher, Adrian Targeted Policies Enhance Private Investment and Scutaru, and Sandeep Singh. 2021. “Small Business, Create Jobs. Washington, DC: World Bank. https:// Big Growth: How Investing SMEs Creates Jobs.” openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/2245 Washington, DC: International Finance Corporation. Eliasz, Toni, Jamil Wyne, and Sarah Lenoble. 2021. Lederman, Daniel, Julian Messina, Samuel Pienknagura, “The Evolution and State Singapore Start-Up and Jamele Rigolini. 2014. Latin American Entrepreneurs: Ecosystem: Lessons for Emerging Market Economies.” Many Firms but Little Innovation. Washington, DC: Washington, DC: World Bank. ECO DAT World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/ Application Home Delivery Service].” https://www. handle/10986/16457 sc.gob.sv/index.php/sala_multimedia/monitoreo-de- plataformas-digitales-de-servicios-de-entrega-a- Luzardo, Alejandra, and Gerardo Funes. 2019. domicilio/ TechnoCreative Entrepreneurships: Creativity and Technology: Allies Enemies? IDB (Inter-American Souminen, Kati, and Gabriela Montenegro. 2020. Development Bank). https://doi.org/10.18235/0001854 Opportunities, Challenges and Gaps for the Development and Use E-Commerce MSMEs Central America. Maria, Augustin, Jose Luis Acero, Ana Aguilera, CENPROMYPE/SICA. and Marisa Garcia Lozano, eds. 2017. Central America Urbanization Review: Making Cities Work for Central Tradros, Farid, and Susanna Horton. 2018. “Towards America. Directions Development. Washington, DC: the Emergence Next Generation Entrepreneurs World Bank. 2017. Africa: White Paper for Discussion.” IFC. OECD. 2021. “Broadband Portal.” OECD Home. https:// Van Welsum. 2016. "Enabling Digital Entrepreneurs." www.oecd.org/sti/broadband/broadband-statistics/. Background Paper. World Bank Group. http://pubdocs. worldbank.org/en/354261452529895321/WDR16-BP- Peña, Ignacio. 2021. “Tecnolatinas: The LAC Enabling-digial-entrepreneurs-DWELSUM.pdf Startup Ecosystem Comes Age.” Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). https://publications.iadb.org/ Watkins, Mark, Sayabek Ziyadin, Aliya Imatayeva, en/publications/english/document/Tecnolatinas-2021- Aizhan Kurmangalieva, and Aigerim Blembayeva. 2018. The-LAC-Startup-Ecosystem-Comes-of-Age.pdf “Digital Tourism Key Factor the Development the Economy.” Economic Annals-XXI, no. 169: 40–45. Periódico Equilibrium. 2018. “Hugo App Sería Primer ‘Unicornio’ Centroamericano Originado Salvador Wolf, Michael, and Dalton Terrell. 2016. “The High-Tech [Hugo App Would the First Central American Industry: What and Why Matters Our ‘Unicorn’ Originating Salvador],” November 24, Economic Future.” Beyond the Numbers (8). https:// 2018. https://www.periodicoequilibrium.com/hugo- www.bls.gov/opub/btn/volume-5/pdf/the-high-tech- app-seria-el-primer-unicornio-centroamericano- industry-what-is-it-and-why-it-matters-to-our- originado-en-el-salvador/ economic-future.pdf Rajahonka, Mervi, and Kaija Villman. 2019. “Women World Bank. 2018. “Tech Startup Ecosystem West Managers and Entrepreneurs and Digitalization: Bank and Gaza: Findings and Recommendations.” the Verge New Era Nervous Breakdown?” Washington, DC: World Bank. http://hdl.handle. Technology Innovation Management Review (6): 14–24. net/10986/31075 https://doi.org/10.22215/timreview/1246 World Bank. 2019. “New Metrics Entrepreneurship. Rooney, Matt. 2020. Toward Digital Strategy for Assessing Entrepreneurship Ecosystems Guide Competitiveness and Integration the Northern Triangle. Policy Action.” Manuscript. George Bush Institute, SMU Economic Growth World Bank Group. 2021. Global Economic Prospects: Initiative. https://gwbcenter.imgix.net/Publications/ January 2021. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://doi. Resources/gwbi-capp-digital-strategy-northern- org/10.1596/978-1-4648-1612-3 triangle.pdf Ziegler, Sandra, Joaquín Arias Segura, Matías Bosio, Senor, Dan, and Saul Singer. 2009. Start-Up Nation: and Kemly Camacho. 2020. “Rural Connectivity The Story Israel Economic Miracle. New York; Boston: Latin America and the Caribbean: Bridge for Twelve. Sustainable Development Time Pandemic.” Superintendencia Competencia. 2020. “Informe IICA/IDB/Microsoft. https://repositorio.iica.int/ sobre Análisis Plataformas Digitales Salvador: handle/11324/12896zvv Aplicación Servicio Entrega Domicilio [Report Analysis Digital Platforms Salvador: OVAT CEN 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, 20433 www.ifc.org